The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Hound of the Baskervilles
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Hound of the Baskervilles

Author: Arthur Conan Doyle

Release date: October 1, 2001 [eBook #2852]
                Most recently updated: August 4, 2025

Language: English

Credits: Shreevatsa R, and David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOUND OF THE BASKERVILLES ***




THE HOUND OF THE BASKERVILLES

Another Adventure of Sherlock Holmes


by A. Conan Doyle




My dear Robinson,


    It was to your account of a West-Country legend that this tale owes its
inception. For this and for your help in the details all thanks.



Yours most truly,        

A. Conan Doyle.    



Hindhead,

    Haslemere.



Contents


 Chapter 1  Mr. Sherlock Holmes
 Chapter 2  The Curse of the Baskervilles
 Chapter 3  The Problem
 Chapter 4  Sir Henry Baskerville
 Chapter 5  Three Broken Threads
 Chapter 6  Baskerville Hall
 Chapter 7  The Stapletons of Merripit House
 Chapter 8  First Report of Dr. Watson
 Chapter 9  The Light upon the Moor [Second Report of Dr. Watson]
 Chapter 10 Extract from the Diary of Dr. Watson
 Chapter 11 The Man on the Tor
 Chapter 12 Death on the Moor
 Chapter 13 Fixing the Nets
 Chapter 14 The Hound of the Baskervilles
 Chapter 15 A Retrospection




Chapter 1.
Mr. Sherlock Holmes


      Mr. Sherlock Holmes, who was usually very late in the mornings,
      save upon those not infrequent occasions when he was up all
      night, was seated at the breakfast table. I stood upon the
      hearth-rug and picked up the stick which our visitor had left
      behind him the night before. It was a fine, thick piece of wood,
      bulbous-headed, of the sort which is known as a “Penang lawyer.”
      Just under the head was a broad silver band nearly an inch
      across. “To James Mortimer, M.R.C.S., from his friends of the
      C.C.H.,” was engraved upon it, with the date “1884.” It was just
      such a stick as the old-fashioned family practitioner used to
      carry—dignified, solid, and reassuring.

      “Well, Watson, what do you make of it?”

      Holmes was sitting with his back to me, and I had given him no
      sign of my occupation.

      “How did you know what I was doing? I believe you have eyes in
      the back of your head.”

      “I have, at least, a well-polished, silver-plated coffee-pot in
      front of me,” said he. “But, tell me, Watson, what do you make of
      our visitor’s stick? Since we have been so unfortunate as to miss
      him and have no notion of his errand, this accidental souvenir
      becomes of importance. Let me hear you reconstruct the man by an
      examination of it.”

      “I think,” said I, following as far as I could the methods of my
      companion, “that Dr. Mortimer is a successful, elderly medical
      man, well-esteemed since those who know him give him this mark of
      their appreciation.”

      “Good!” said Holmes. “Excellent!”

      “I think also that the probability is in favour of his being a
      country practitioner who does a great deal of his visiting on
      foot.”

      “Why so?”

      “Because this stick, though originally a very handsome one has
      been so knocked about that I can hardly imagine a town
      practitioner carrying it. The thick-iron ferrule is worn down, so
      it is evident that he has done a great amount of walking with
      it.”

      “Perfectly sound!” said Holmes.

      “And then again, there is the ‘friends of the C.C.H.’ I should
      guess that to be the Something Hunt, the local hunt to whose
      members he has possibly given some surgical assistance, and which
      has made him a small presentation in return.”

      “Really, Watson, you excel yourself,” said Holmes, pushing back
      his chair and lighting a cigarette. “I am bound to say that in
      all the accounts which you have been so good as to give of my own
      small achievements you have habitually underrated your own
      abilities. It may be that you are not yourself luminous, but you
      are a conductor of light. Some people without possessing genius
      have a remarkable power of stimulating it. I confess, my dear
      fellow, that I am very much in your debt.”

      He had never said as much before, and I must admit that his words
      gave me keen pleasure, for I had often been piqued by his
      indifference to my admiration and to the attempts which I had
      made to give publicity to his methods. I was proud, too, to think
      that I had so far mastered his system as to apply it in a way
      which earned his approval. He now took the stick from my hands
      and examined it for a few minutes with his naked eyes. Then with
      an expression of interest he laid down his cigarette, and
      carrying the cane to the window, he looked over it again with a
      convex lens.

      “Interesting, though elementary,” said he as he returned to his
      favourite corner of the settee. “There are certainly one or two
      indications upon the stick. It gives us the basis for several
      deductions.”

      “Has anything escaped me?” I asked with some self-importance. “I
      trust that there is nothing of consequence which I have
      overlooked?”

      “I am afraid, my dear Watson, that most of your conclusions were
      erroneous. When I said that you stimulated me I meant, to be
      frank, that in noting your fallacies I was occasionally guided
      towards the truth. Not that you are entirely wrong in this
      instance. The man is certainly a country practitioner. And he
      walks a good deal.”

      “Then I was right.”

      “To that extent.”

      “But that was all.”

      “No, no, my dear Watson, not all—by no means all. I would
      suggest, for example, that a presentation to a doctor is more
      likely to come from a hospital than from a hunt, and that when
      the initials ‘C.C.’ are placed before that hospital the words
      ‘Charing Cross’ very naturally suggest themselves.”

      “You may be right.”

      “The probability lies in that direction. And if we take this as a
      working hypothesis we have a fresh basis from which to start our
      construction of this unknown visitor.”

      “Well, then, supposing that ‘C.C.H.’ does stand for ‘Charing
      Cross Hospital,’ what further inferences may we draw?”

      “Do none suggest themselves? You know my methods. Apply them!”

      “I can only think of the obvious conclusion that the man has
      practised in town before going to the country.”

      “I think that we might venture a little farther than this. Look
      at it in this light. On what occasion would it be most probable
      that such a presentation would be made? When would his friends
      unite to give him a pledge of their good will? Obviously at the
      moment when Dr. Mortimer withdrew from the service of the
      hospital in order to start a practice for himself. We know there
      has been a presentation. We believe there has been a change from
      a town hospital to a country practice. Is it, then, stretching
      our inference too far to say that the presentation was on the
      occasion of the change?”

      “It certainly seems probable.”

      “Now, you will observe that he could not have been on the _staff_
      of the hospital, since only a man well-established in a London
      practice could hold such a position, and such a one would not
      drift into the country. What was he, then? If he was in the
      hospital and yet not on the staff he could only have been a
      house-surgeon or a house-physician—little more than a senior
      student. And he left five years ago—the date is on the stick. So
      your grave, middle-aged family practitioner vanishes into thin
      air, my dear Watson, and there emerges a young fellow under
      thirty, amiable, unambitious, absent-minded, and the possessor of
      a favourite dog, which I should describe roughly as being larger
      than a terrier and smaller than a mastiff.”

      I laughed incredulously as Sherlock Holmes leaned back in his
      settee and blew little wavering rings of smoke up to the ceiling.

      “As to the latter part, I have no means of checking you,” said I,
      “but at least it is not difficult to find out a few particulars
      about the man’s age and professional career.” From my small
      medical shelf I took down the Medical Directory and turned up the
      name. There were several Mortimers, but only one who could be our
      visitor. I read his record aloud.

        “Mortimer, James, M.R.C.S., 1882, Grimpen, Dartmoor, Devon.
        House-surgeon, from 1882 to 1884, at Charing Cross Hospital.
        Winner of the Jackson prize for Comparative Pathology, with
        essay entitled ‘Is Disease a Reversion?’  Corresponding member
        of the Swedish Pathological Society.  Author of ‘Some Freaks of
        Atavism’ (_Lancet_ 1882).  ‘Do We Progress?’ (_Journal of
        Psychology_, March, 1883). Medical Officer for the parishes of
        Grimpen, Thorsley, and High Barrow.”

      “No mention of that local hunt, Watson,” said Holmes with a
      mischievous smile, “but a country doctor, as you very astutely
      observed. I think that I am fairly justified in my inferences. As
      to the adjectives, I said, if I remember right, amiable,
      unambitious, and absent-minded. It is my experience that it is
      only an amiable man in this world who receives testimonials, only
      an unambitious one who abandons a London career for the country,
      and only an absent-minded one who leaves his stick and not his
      visiting-card after waiting an hour in your room.”

      “And the dog?”

      “Has been in the habit of carrying this stick behind his master.
      Being a heavy stick the dog has held it tightly by the middle,
      and the marks of his teeth are very plainly visible. The dog’s
      jaw, as shown in the space between these marks, is too broad in
      my opinion for a terrier and not broad enough for a mastiff. It
      may have been—yes, by Jove, it _is_ a curly-haired spaniel.”

      He had risen and paced the room as he spoke. Now he halted in the
      recess of the window. There was such a ring of conviction in his
      voice that I glanced up in surprise.

      “My dear fellow, how can you possibly be so sure of that?”

      “For the very simple reason that I see the dog himself on our
      very door-step, and there is the ring of its owner. Don’t move, I
      beg you, Watson. He is a professional brother of yours, and your
      presence may be of assistance to me. Now is the dramatic moment
      of fate, Watson, when you hear a step upon the stair which is
      walking into your life, and you know not whether for good or ill.
      What does Dr. James Mortimer, the man of science, ask of Sherlock
      Holmes, the specialist in crime? Come in!”

      The appearance of our visitor was a surprise to me, since I had
      expected a typical country practitioner. He was a very tall, thin
      man, with a long nose like a beak, which jutted out between two
      keen, grey eyes, set closely together and sparkling brightly from
      behind a pair of gold-rimmed glasses. He was clad in a
      professional but rather slovenly fashion, for his frock-coat was
      dingy and his trousers frayed. Though young, his long back was
      already bowed, and he walked with a forward thrust of his head
      and a general air of peering benevolence. As he entered his eyes
      fell upon the stick in Holmes’s hand, and he ran towards it with
      an exclamation of joy. “I am so very glad,” said he. “I was not
      sure whether I had left it here or in the Shipping Office. I
      would not lose that stick for the world.”

      “A presentation, I see,” said Holmes.

      “Yes, sir.”

      “From Charing Cross Hospital?”

      “From one or two friends there on the occasion of my marriage.”

      “Dear, dear, that’s bad!” said Holmes, shaking his head.

      Dr. Mortimer blinked through his glasses in mild astonishment.
      “Why was it bad?”

      “Only that you have disarranged our little deductions. Your
      marriage, you say?”

      “Yes, sir. I married, and so left the hospital, and with it all
      hopes of a consulting practice. It was necessary to make a home
      of my own.”

      “Come, come, we are not so far wrong, after all,” said Holmes.
      “And now, Dr. James Mortimer—”

      “Mister, sir, Mister—a humble M.R.C.S.”

      “And a man of precise mind, evidently.”

      “A dabbler in science, Mr. Holmes, a picker up of shells on the
      shores of the great unknown ocean. I presume that it is Mr.
      Sherlock Holmes whom I am addressing and not—”

      “No, this is my friend Dr. Watson.”

      “Glad to meet you, sir. I have heard your name mentioned in
      connection with that of your friend. You interest me very much,
      Mr. Holmes. I had hardly expected so dolichocephalic a skull or
      such well-marked supra-orbital development. Would you have any
      objection to my running my finger along your parietal fissure? A
      cast of your skull, sir, until the original is available, would
      be an ornament to any anthropological museum. It is not my
      intention to be fulsome, but I confess that I covet your skull.”

      Sherlock Holmes waved our strange visitor into a chair. “You are
      an enthusiast in your line of thought, I perceive, sir, as I am
      in mine,” said he. “I observe from your forefinger that you make
      your own cigarettes. Have no hesitation in lighting one.”

      The man drew out paper and tobacco and twirled the one up in the
      other with surprising dexterity. He had long, quivering fingers
      as agile and restless as the antennæ of an insect.

      Holmes was silent, but his little darting glances showed me the
      interest which he took in our curious companion. “I presume,
      sir,” said he at last, “that it was not merely for the purpose of
      examining my skull that you have done me the honour to call here
      last night and again today?”

      “No, sir, no; though I am happy to have had the opportunity of
      doing that as well. I came to you, Mr. Holmes, because I
      recognized that I am myself an unpractical man and because I am
      suddenly confronted with a most serious and extraordinary
      problem. Recognizing, as I do, that you are the second highest
      expert in Europe—”

      “Indeed, sir! May I inquire who has the honour to be the first?”
      asked Holmes with some asperity.

      “To the man of precisely scientific mind the work of Monsieur
      Bertillon must always appeal strongly.”

      “Then had you not better consult him?”

      “I said, sir, to the precisely scientific mind. But as a
      practical man of affairs it is acknowledged that you stand alone.
      I trust, sir, that I have not inadvertently—”

      “Just a little,” said Holmes. “I think, Dr. Mortimer, you would
      do wisely if without more ado you would kindly tell me plainly
      what the exact nature of the problem is in which you demand my
      assistance.”




Chapter 2.
The Curse of the Baskervilles


      “I have in my pocket a manuscript,” said Dr. James Mortimer.

      “I observed it as you entered the room,” said Holmes.

      “It is an old manuscript.”

      “Early eighteenth century, unless it is a forgery.”

      “How can you say that, sir?”

      “You have presented an inch or two of it to my examination all
      the time that you have been talking. It would be a poor expert
      who could not give the date of a document within a decade or so.
      You may possibly have read my little monograph upon the subject.
      I put that at 1730.”

      “The exact date is 1742.” Dr. Mortimer drew it from his
      breast-pocket. “This family paper was committed to my care by Sir
      Charles Baskerville, whose sudden and tragic death some three
      months ago created so much excitement in Devonshire. I may say
      that I was his personal friend as well as his medical attendant.
      He was a strong-minded man, sir, shrewd, practical, and as
      unimaginative as I am myself. Yet he took this document very
      seriously, and his mind was prepared for just such an end as did
      eventually overtake him.”

      Holmes stretched out his hand for the manuscript and flattened it
      upon his knee. “You will observe, Watson, the alternative use of
      the long _s_ and the short. It is one of several indications
      which enabled me to fix the date.”

      I looked over his shoulder at the yellow paper and the faded
      script. At the head was written: “Baskerville Hall,” and below in
      large, scrawling figures: “1742.”

      “It appears to be a statement of some sort.”

      “Yes, it is a statement of a certain legend which runs in the
      Baskerville family.”

      “But I understand that it is something more modern and practical
      upon which you wish to consult me?”

      “Most modern. A most practical, pressing matter, which must be
      decided within twenty-four hours. But the manuscript is short and
      is intimately connected with the affair. With your permission I
      will read it to you.”

      Holmes leaned back in his chair, placed his finger-tips together,
      and closed his eyes, with an air of resignation. Dr. Mortimer
      turned the manuscript to the light and read in a high, cracking
      voice the following curious, old-world narrative:

        “Of the origin of the Hound of the Baskervilles there have been
        many statements, yet as I come in a direct line from Hugo
        Baskerville, and as I had the story from my father, who also
        had it from his, I have set it down with all belief that it
        occurred even as is here set forth. And I would have you
        believe, my sons, that the same Justice which punishes sin may
        also most graciously forgive it, and that no ban is so heavy
        but that by prayer and repentance it may be removed.  Learn
        then from this story not to fear the fruits of the past, but
        rather to be circumspect in the future, that those foul
        passions whereby our family has suffered so grievously may not
        again be loosed to our undoing.

            “Know then that in the time of the Great Rebellion (the
            history of which by the learned Lord Clarendon I most
            earnestly commend to your attention) this Manor of
            Baskerville was held by Hugo of that name, nor can it be
            gainsaid that he was a most wild, profane, and godless man.
             This, in truth, his neighbours might have pardoned, seeing
            that saints have never flourished in those parts, but there
            was in him a certain wanton and cruel humour which made his
            name a by-word through the West.  It chanced that this Hugo
            came to love (if, indeed, so dark a passion may be known
            under so bright a name) the daughter of a yeoman who held
            lands near the Baskerville estate. But the young maiden,
            being discreet and of good repute, would ever avoid him,
            for she feared his evil name.  So it came to pass that one
            Michaelmas this Hugo, with five or six of his idle and
            wicked companions, stole down upon the farm and carried off
            the maiden, her father and brothers being from home, as he
            well knew.  When they had brought her to the Hall the
            maiden was placed in an upper chamber, while Hugo and his
            friends sat down to a long carouse, as was their nightly
            custom.  Now, the poor lass upstairs was like to have her
            wits turned at the singing and shouting and terrible oaths
            which came up to her from below, for they say that the
            words used by Hugo Baskerville, when he was in wine, were
            such as might blast the man who said them.  At last in the
            stress of her fear she did that which might have daunted
            the bravest or most active man, for by the aid of the
            growth of ivy which covered (and still covers) the south
            wall she came down from under the eaves, and so homeward
            across the moor, there being three leagues betwixt the Hall
            and her father’s farm.

            “It chanced that some little time later Hugo left his
            guests to carry food and drink—with other worse things,
            perchance—to his captive, and so found the cage empty and
            the bird escaped.  Then, as it would seem, he became as one
            that hath a devil, for, rushing down the stairs into the
            dining-hall, he sprang upon the great table, flagons and
            trenchers flying before him, and he cried aloud before all
            the company that he would that very night render his body
            and soul to the Powers of Evil if he might but overtake the
            wench.  And while the revellers stood aghast at the fury of
            the man, one more wicked or, it may be, more drunken than
            the rest, cried out that they should put the hounds upon
            her.  Whereat Hugo ran from the house, crying to his grooms
            that they should saddle his mare and unkennel the pack, and
            giving the hounds a kerchief of the maid’s, he swung them
            to the line, and so off full cry in the moonlight over the
            moor.

            “Now, for some space the revellers stood agape, unable to
            understand all that had been done in such haste.  But anon
            their bemused wits awoke to the nature of the deed which
            was like to be done upon the moorlands.  Everything was now
            in an uproar, some calling for their pistols, some for
            their horses, and some for another flask of wine.  But at
            length some sense came back to their crazed minds, and the
            whole of them, thirteen in number, took horse and started
            in pursuit.  The moon shone clear above them, and they rode
            swiftly abreast, taking that course which the maid must
            needs have taken if she were to reach her own home.

            “They had gone a mile or two when they passed one of the
            night shepherds upon the moorlands, and they cried to him
            to know if he had seen the hunt.  And the man, as the story
            goes, was so crazed with fear that he could scarce speak,
            but at last he said that he had indeed seen the unhappy
            maiden, with the hounds upon her track.  ‘But I have seen
            more than that,’ said he, ‘for Hugo Baskerville passed me
            upon his black mare, and there ran mute behind him such a
            hound of hell as God forbid should ever be at my heels.’ 
            So the drunken squires cursed the shepherd and rode onward.
             But soon their skins turned cold, for there came a
            galloping across the moor, and the black mare, dabbled with
            white froth, went past with trailing bridle and empty
            saddle.  Then the revellers rode close together, for a
            great fear was on them, but they still followed over the
            moor, though each, had he been alone, would have been right
            glad to have turned his horse’s head.  Riding slowly in
            this fashion they came at last upon the hounds.  These,
            though known for their valour and their breed, were
            whimpering in a cluster at the head of a deep dip or goyal,
            as we call it, upon the moor, some slinking away and some,
            with starting hackles and staring eyes, gazing down the
            narrow valley before them.

            “The company had come to a halt, more sober men, as you may
            guess, than when they started.  The most of them would by
            no means advance, but three of them, the boldest, or it may
            be the most drunken, rode forward down the goyal. Now, it
            opened into a broad space in which stood two of those great
            stones, still to be seen there, which were set by certain
            forgotten peoples in the days of old. The moon was shining
            bright upon the clearing, and there in the centre lay the
            unhappy maid where she had fallen, dead of fear and of
            fatigue.  But it was not the sight of her body, nor yet was
            it that of the body of Hugo Baskerville lying near her,
            which raised the hair upon the heads of these three
            dare-devil roysterers, but it was that, standing over Hugo,
            and plucking at his throat, there stood a foul thing, a
            great, black beast, shaped like a hound, yet larger than
            any hound that ever mortal eye has rested upon.  And even
            as they looked the thing tore the throat out of Hugo
            Baskerville, on which, as it turned its blazing eyes and
            dripping jaws upon them, the three shrieked with fear and
            rode for dear life, still screaming, across the moor.  One,
            it is said, died that very night of what he had seen, and
            the other twain were but broken men for the rest of their
            days.

            “Such is the tale, my sons, of the coming of the hound
            which is said to have plagued the family so sorely ever
            since.  If I have set it down it is because that which is
            clearly known hath less terror than that which is but
            hinted at and guessed.  Nor can it be denied that many of
            the family have been unhappy in their deaths, which have
            been sudden, bloody, and mysterious.  Yet may we shelter
            ourselves in the infinite goodness of Providence, which
            would not forever punish the innocent beyond that third or
            fourth generation which is threatened in Holy Writ.  To
            that Providence, my sons, I hereby commend you, and I
            counsel you by way of caution to forbear from crossing the
            moor in those dark hours when the powers of evil are
            exalted.

            “[This from Hugo Baskerville to his sons Rodger and John,
            with instructions that they say nothing thereof to their
            sister Elizabeth.]”

      When Dr. Mortimer had finished reading this singular narrative he
      pushed his spectacles up on his forehead and stared across at Mr.
      Sherlock Holmes. The latter yawned and tossed the end of his
      cigarette into the fire.

      “Well?” said he.

      “Do you not find it interesting?”

      “To a collector of fairy tales.”

      Dr. Mortimer drew a folded newspaper out of his pocket.

      “Now, Mr. Holmes, we will give you something a little more
      recent. This is the _Devon County Chronicle_ of May 14th of this
      year. It is a short account of the facts elicited at the death of
      Sir Charles Baskerville which occurred a few days before that
      date.”

      My friend leaned a little forward and his expression became
      intent. Our visitor readjusted his glasses and began:

        “The recent sudden death of Sir Charles Baskerville, whose name
        has been mentioned as the probable Liberal candidate for
        Mid-Devon at the next election, has cast a gloom over the
        county.  Though Sir Charles had resided at Baskerville Hall for
        a comparatively short period his amiability of character and
        extreme generosity had won the affection and respect of all who
        had been brought into contact with him.  In these days of
        _nouveaux riches_ it is refreshing to find a case where the
        scion of an old county family which has fallen upon evil days
        is able to make his own fortune and to bring it back with him
        to restore the fallen grandeur of his line.  Sir Charles, as is
        well known, made large sums of money in South African
        speculation. More wise than those who go on until the wheel
        turns against them, he realised his gains and returned to
        England with them.  It is only two years since he took up his
        residence at Baskerville Hall, and it is common talk how large
        were those schemes of reconstruction and improvement which have
        been interrupted by his death.  Being himself childless, it was
        his openly expressed desire that the whole countryside should,
        within his own lifetime, profit by his good fortune, and many
        will have personal reasons for bewailing his untimely end.  His
        generous donations to local and county charities have been
        frequently chronicled in these columns.

            “The circumstances connected with the death of Sir Charles
            cannot be said to have been entirely cleared up by the
            inquest, but at least enough has been done to dispose of
            those rumours to which local superstition has given rise.
            There is no reason whatever to suspect foul play, or to
            imagine that death could be from any but natural causes.
            Sir Charles was a widower, and a man who may be said to
            have been in some ways of an eccentric habit of mind. In
            spite of his considerable wealth he was simple in his
            personal tastes, and his indoor servants at Baskerville
            Hall consisted of a married couple named Barrymore, the
            husband acting as butler and the wife as housekeeper. Their
            evidence, corroborated by that of several friends, tends to
            show that Sir Charles’s health has for some time been
            impaired, and points especially to some affection of the
            heart, manifesting itself in changes of colour,
            breathlessness, and acute attacks of nervous depression.
            Dr. James Mortimer, the friend and medical attendant of the
            deceased, has given evidence to the same effect.

            “The facts of the case are simple.  Sir Charles Baskerville
            was in the habit every night before going to bed of walking
            down the famous yew alley of Baskerville Hall.  The
            evidence of the Barrymores shows that this had been his
            custom. On the fourth of May Sir Charles had declared his
            intention of starting next day for London, and had ordered
            Barrymore to prepare his luggage.  That night he went out
            as usual for his nocturnal walk, in the course of which he
            was in the habit of smoking a cigar.  He never returned. 
            At twelve o’clock Barrymore, finding the hall door still
            open, became alarmed, and, lighting a lantern, went in
            search of his master.  The day had been wet, and Sir
            Charles’s footmarks were easily traced down the alley. 
            Halfway down this walk there is a gate which leads out on
            to the moor. There were indications that Sir Charles had
            stood for some little time here.  He then proceeded down
            the alley, and it was at the far end of it that his body
            was discovered. One fact which has not been explained is
            the statement of Barrymore that his master’s footprints
            altered their character from the time that he passed the
            moor-gate, and that he appeared from thence onward to have
            been walking upon his toes.  One Murphy, a gipsy
            horse-dealer, was on the moor at no great distance at the
            time, but he appears by his own confession to have been the
            worse for drink. He declares that he heard cries but is
            unable to state from what direction they came.  No signs of
            violence were to be discovered upon Sir Charles’s person,
            and though the doctor’s evidence pointed to an almost
            incredible facial distortion—so great that Dr. Mortimer
            refused at first to believe that it was indeed his friend
            and patient who lay before him—it was explained that that
            is a symptom which is not unusual in cases of dyspnœa and
            death from cardiac exhaustion.  This explanation was borne
            out by the post-mortem examination, which showed
            long-standing organic disease, and the coroner’s jury
            returned a verdict in accordance with the medical evidence.
             It is well that this is so, for it is obviously of the
            utmost importance that Sir Charles’s heir should settle at
            the Hall and continue the good work which has been so sadly
            interrupted.  Had the prosaic finding of the coroner not
            finally put an end to the romantic stories which have been
            whispered in connection with the affair, it might have been
            difficult to find a tenant for Baskerville Hall.  It is
            understood that the next of kin is Mr. Henry Baskerville,
            if he be still alive, the son of Sir Charles Baskerville’s
            younger brother.  The young man when last heard of was in
            America, and inquiries are being instituted with a view to
            informing him of his good fortune.”

      Dr. Mortimer refolded his paper and replaced it in his pocket.
      “Those are the public facts, Mr. Holmes, in connection with the
      death of Sir Charles Baskerville.”

      “I must thank you,” said Sherlock Holmes, “for calling my
      attention to a case which certainly presents some features of
      interest. I had observed some newspaper comment at the time, but
      I was exceedingly preoccupied by that little affair of the
      Vatican cameos, and in my anxiety to oblige the Pope I lost touch
      with several interesting English cases. This article, you say,
      contains all the public facts?”

      “It does.”

      “Then let me have the private ones.” He leaned back, put his
      finger-tips together, and assumed his most impassive and judicial
      expression.

      “In doing so,” said Dr. Mortimer, who had begun to show signs of
      some strong emotion, “I am telling that which I have not confided
      to anyone. My motive for withholding it from the coroner’s
      inquiry is that a man of science shrinks from placing himself in
      the public position of seeming to indorse a popular superstition.
      I had the further motive that Baskerville Hall, as the paper
      says, would certainly remain untenanted if anything were done to
      increase its already rather grim reputation. For both these
      reasons I thought that I was justified in telling rather less
      than I knew, since no practical good could result from it, but
      with you there is no reason why I should not be perfectly frank.

      “The moor is very sparsely inhabited, and those who live near
      each other are thrown very much together. For this reason I saw a
      good deal of Sir Charles Baskerville. With the exception of Mr.
      Frankland, of Lafter Hall, and Mr. Stapleton, the naturalist,
      there are no other men of education within many miles. Sir
      Charles was a retiring man, but the chance of his illness brought
      us together, and a community of interests in science kept us so.
      He had brought back much scientific information from South
      Africa, and many a charming evening we have spent together
      discussing the comparative anatomy of the Bushman and the
      Hottentot.

      “Within the last few months it became increasingly plain to me
      that Sir Charles’s nervous system was strained to the breaking
      point. He had taken this legend which I have read you exceedingly
      to heart—so much so that, although he would walk in his own
      grounds, nothing would induce him to go out upon the moor at
      night. Incredible as it may appear to you, Mr. Holmes, he was
      honestly convinced that a dreadful fate overhung his family, and
      certainly the records which he was able to give of his ancestors
      were not encouraging. The idea of some ghastly presence
      constantly haunted him, and on more than one occasion he has
      asked me whether I had on my medical journeys at night ever seen
      any strange creature or heard the baying of a hound. The latter
      question he put to me several times, and always with a voice
      which vibrated with excitement.

      “I can well remember driving up to his house in the evening some
      three weeks before the fatal event. He chanced to be at his hall
      door. I had descended from my gig and was standing in front of
      him, when I saw his eyes fix themselves over my shoulder and
      stare past me with an expression of the most dreadful horror. I
      whisked round and had just time to catch a glimpse of something
      which I took to be a large black calf passing at the head of the
      drive. So excited and alarmed was he that I was compelled to go
      down to the spot where the animal had been and look around for
      it. It was gone, however, and the incident appeared to make the
      worst impression upon his mind. I stayed with him all the
      evening, and it was on that occasion, to explain the emotion
      which he had shown, that he confided to my keeping that narrative
      which I read to you when first I came. I mention this small
      episode because it assumes some importance in view of the tragedy
      which followed, but I was convinced at the time that the matter
      was entirely trivial and that his excitement had no
      justification.

      “It was at my advice that Sir Charles was about to go to London.
      His heart was, I knew, affected, and the constant anxiety in
      which he lived, however chimerical the cause of it might be, was
      evidently having a serious effect upon his health. I thought that
      a few months among the distractions of town would send him back a
      new man. Mr. Stapleton, a mutual friend who was much concerned at
      his state of health, was of the same opinion. At the last instant
      came this terrible catastrophe.

      “On the night of Sir Charles’s death Barrymore the butler, who
      made the discovery, sent Perkins the groom on horseback to me,
      and as I was sitting up late I was able to reach Baskerville Hall
      within an hour of the event. I checked and corroborated all the
      facts which were mentioned at the inquest. I followed the
      footsteps down the yew alley, I saw the spot at the moor-gate
      where he seemed to have waited, I remarked the change in the
      shape of the prints after that point, I noted that there were no
      other footsteps save those of Barrymore on the soft gravel, and
      finally I carefully examined the body, which had not been touched
      until my arrival. Sir Charles lay on his face, his arms out, his
      fingers dug into the ground, and his features convulsed with some
      strong emotion to such an extent that I could hardly have sworn
      to his identity. There was certainly no physical injury of any
      kind. But one false statement was made by Barrymore at the
      inquest. He said that there were no traces upon the ground round
      the body. He did not observe any. But I did—some little distance
      off, but fresh and clear.”

      “Footprints?”

      “Footprints.”

      “A man’s or a woman’s?”

      Dr. Mortimer looked strangely at us for an instant, and his voice
      sank almost to a whisper as he answered.

      “Mr. Holmes, they were the footprints of a gigantic hound!”




Chapter 3.
The Problem


      I confess at these words a shudder passed through me. There was a
      thrill in the doctor’s voice which showed that he was himself
      deeply moved by that which he told us. Holmes leaned forward in
      his excitement and his eyes had the hard, dry glitter which shot
      from them when he was keenly interested.

      “You saw this?”

      “As clearly as I see you.”

      “And you said nothing?”

      “What was the use?”

      “How was it that no one else saw it?”

      “The marks were some twenty yards from the body and no one gave
      them a thought. I don’t suppose I should have done so had I not
      known this legend.”

      “There are many sheep-dogs on the moor?”

      “No doubt, but this was no sheep-dog.”

      “You say it was large?”

      “Enormous.”

      “But it had not approached the body?”

      “No.”

      “What sort of night was it?”

      “Damp and raw.”

      “But not actually raining?”

      “No.”

      “What is the alley like?”

      “There are two lines of old yew hedge, twelve feet high and
      impenetrable. The walk in the centre is about eight feet across.”

      “Is there anything between the hedges and the walk?”

      “Yes, there is a strip of grass about six feet broad on either
      side.”

      “I understand that the yew hedge is penetrated at one point by a
      gate?”

      “Yes, the wicket-gate which leads on to the moor.”

      “Is there any other opening?”

      “None.”

      “So that to reach the yew alley one either has to come down it
      from the house or else to enter it by the moor-gate?”

      “There is an exit through a summer-house at the far end.”

      “Had Sir Charles reached this?”

      “No; he lay about fifty yards from it.”

      “Now, tell me, Dr. Mortimer—and this is important—the marks which
      you saw were on the path and not on the grass?”

      “No marks could show on the grass.”

      “Were they on the same side of the path as the moor-gate?”

      “Yes; they were on the edge of the path on the same side as the
      moor-gate.”

      “You interest me exceedingly. Another point. Was the wicket-gate
      closed?”

      “Closed and padlocked.”

      “How high was it?”

      “About four feet high.”

      “Then anyone could have got over it?”

      “Yes.”

      “And what marks did you see by the wicket-gate?”

      “None in particular.”

      “Good heaven! Did no one examine?”

      “Yes, I examined, myself.”

      “And found nothing?”

      “It was all very confused. Sir Charles had evidently stood there
      for five or ten minutes.”

      “How do you know that?”

      “Because the ash had twice dropped from his cigar.”

      “Excellent! This is a colleague, Watson, after our own heart. But
      the marks?”

      “He had left his own marks all over that small patch of gravel. I
      could discern no others.”

      Sherlock Holmes struck his hand against his knee with an
      impatient gesture.

      “If I had only been there!” he cried. “It is evidently a case of
      extraordinary interest, and one which presented immense
      opportunities to the scientific expert. That gravel page upon
      which I might have read so much has been long ere this smudged by
      the rain and defaced by the clogs of curious peasants. Oh, Dr.
      Mortimer, Dr. Mortimer, to think that you should not have called
      me in! You have indeed much to answer for.”

      “I could not call you in, Mr. Holmes, without disclosing these
      facts to the world, and I have already given my reasons for not
      wishing to do so. Besides, besides—”

      “Why do you hesitate?”

      “There is a realm in which the most acute and most experienced of
      detectives is helpless.”

      “You mean that the thing is supernatural?”

      “I did not positively say so.”

      “No, but you evidently think it.”

      “Since the tragedy, Mr. Holmes, there have come to my ears
      several incidents which are hard to reconcile with the settled
      order of Nature.”

      “For example?”

      “I find that before the terrible event occurred several people
      had seen a creature upon the moor which corresponds with this
      Baskerville demon, and which could not possibly be any animal
      known to science. They all agreed that it was a huge creature,
      luminous, ghastly, and spectral. I have cross-examined these men,
      one of them a hard-headed countryman, one a farrier, and one a
      moorland farmer, who all tell the same story of this dreadful
      apparition, exactly corresponding to the hell-hound of the
      legend. I assure you that there is a reign of terror in the
      district, and that it is a hardy man who will cross the moor at
      night.”

      “And you, a trained man of science, believe it to be
      supernatural?”

      “I do not know what to believe.”

      Holmes shrugged his shoulders. “I have hitherto confined my
      investigations to this world,” said he. “In a modest way I have
      combated evil, but to take on the Father of Evil himself would,
      perhaps, be too ambitious a task. Yet you must admit that the
      footmark is material.”

      “The original hound was material enough to tug a man’s throat
      out, and yet he was diabolical as well.”

      “I see that you have quite gone over to the supernaturalists. But
      now, Dr. Mortimer, tell me this. If you hold these views, why
      have you come to consult me at all? You tell me in the same
      breath that it is useless to investigate Sir Charles’s death, and
      that you desire me to do it.”

      “I did not say that I desired you to do it.”

      “Then, how can I assist you?”

      “By advising me as to what I should do with Sir Henry
      Baskerville, who arrives at Waterloo Station”—Dr. Mortimer looked
      at his watch—“in exactly one hour and a quarter.”

      “He being the heir?”

      “Yes. On the death of Sir Charles we inquired for this young
      gentleman and found that he had been farming in Canada. From the
      accounts which have reached us he is an excellent fellow in every
      way. I speak now not as a medical man but as a trustee and
      executor of Sir Charles’s will.”

      “There is no other claimant, I presume?”

      “None. The only other kinsman whom we have been able to trace was
      Rodger Baskerville, the youngest of three brothers of whom poor
      Sir Charles was the elder. The second brother, who died young, is
      the father of this lad Henry. The third, Rodger, was the black
      sheep of the family. He came of the old masterful Baskerville
      strain and was the very image, they tell me, of the family
      picture of old Hugo. He made England too hot to hold him, fled to
      Central America, and died there in 1876 of yellow fever. Henry is
      the last of the Baskervilles. In one hour and five minutes I meet
      him at Waterloo Station. I have had a wire that he arrived at
      Southampton this morning. Now, Mr. Holmes, what would you advise
      me to do with him?”

      “Why should he not go to the home of his fathers?”

      “It seems natural, does it not? And yet, consider that every
      Baskerville who goes there meets with an evil fate. I feel sure
      that if Sir Charles could have spoken with me before his death he
      would have warned me against bringing this, the last of the old
      race, and the heir to great wealth, to that deadly place. And yet
      it cannot be denied that the prosperity of the whole poor, bleak
      countryside depends upon his presence. All the good work which
      has been done by Sir Charles will crash to the ground if there is
      no tenant of the Hall. I fear lest I should be swayed too much by
      my own obvious interest in the matter, and that is why I bring
      the case before you and ask for your advice.”

      Holmes considered for a little time.

      “Put into plain words, the matter is this,” said he. “In your
      opinion there is a diabolical agency which makes Dartmoor an
      unsafe abode for a Baskerville—that is your opinion?”

      “At least I might go the length of saying that there is some
      evidence that this may be so.”

      “Exactly. But surely, if your supernatural theory be correct, it
      could work the young man evil in London as easily as in
      Devonshire. A devil with merely local powers like a parish vestry
      would be too inconceivable a thing.”

      “You put the matter more flippantly, Mr. Holmes, than you would
      probably do if you were brought into personal contact with these
      things. Your advice, then, as I understand it, is that the young
      man will be as safe in Devonshire as in London. He comes in fifty
      minutes. What would you recommend?”

      “I recommend, sir, that you take a cab, call off your spaniel who
      is scratching at my front door, and proceed to Waterloo to meet
      Sir Henry Baskerville.”

      “And then?”

      “And then you will say nothing to him at all until I have made up
      my mind about the matter.”

      “How long will it take you to make up your mind?”

      “Twenty-four hours. At ten o’clock tomorrow, Dr. Mortimer, I will
      be much obliged to you if you will call upon me here, and it will
      be of help to me in my plans for the future if you will bring Sir
      Henry Baskerville with you.”

      “I will do so, Mr. Holmes.” He scribbled the appointment on his
      shirt-cuff and hurried off in his strange, peering, absent-minded
      fashion. Holmes stopped him at the head of the stair.

      “Only one more question, Dr. Mortimer. You say that before Sir
      Charles Baskerville’s death several people saw this apparition
      upon the moor?”

      “Three people did.”

      “Did any see it after?”

      “I have not heard of any.”

      “Thank you. Good-morning.”

      Holmes returned to his seat with that quiet look of inward
      satisfaction which meant that he had a congenial task before him.

      “Going out, Watson?”

      “Unless I can help you.”

      “No, my dear fellow, it is at the hour of action that I turn to
      you for aid. But this is splendid, really unique from some points
      of view. When you pass Bradley’s, would you ask him to send up a
      pound of the strongest shag tobacco? Thank you. It would be as
      well if you could make it convenient not to return before
      evening. Then I should be very glad to compare impressions as to
      this most interesting problem which has been submitted to us this
      morning.”

      I knew that seclusion and solitude were very necessary for my
      friend in those hours of intense mental concentration during
      which he weighed every particle of evidence, constructed
      alternative theories, balanced one against the other, and made up
      his mind as to which points were essential and which immaterial.
      I therefore spent the day at my club and did not return to Baker
      Street until evening. It was nearly nine o’clock when I found
      myself in the sitting-room once more.

      My first impression as I opened the door was that a fire had
      broken out, for the room was so filled with smoke that the light
      of the lamp upon the table was blurred by it. As I entered,
      however, my fears were set at rest, for it was the acrid fumes of
      strong coarse tobacco which took me by the throat and set me
      coughing. Through the haze I had a vague vision of Holmes in his
      dressing-gown coiled up in an armchair with his black clay pipe
      between his lips. Several rolls of paper lay around him.

      “Caught cold, Watson?” said he.

      “No, it’s this poisonous atmosphere.”

      “I suppose it _is_ pretty thick, now that you mention it.”

      “Thick! It is intolerable.”

      “Open the window, then! You have been at your club all day, I
      perceive.”

      “My dear Holmes!”

      “Am I right?”

      “Certainly, but how?”

      He laughed at my bewildered expression. “There is a delightful
      freshness about you, Watson, which makes it a pleasure to
      exercise any small powers which I possess at your expense. A
      gentleman goes forth on a showery and miry day. He returns
      immaculate in the evening with the gloss still on his hat and his
      boots. He has been a fixture therefore all day. He is not a man
      with intimate friends. Where, then, could he have been? Is it not
      obvious?”

      “Well, it is rather obvious.”

      “The world is full of obvious things which nobody by any chance
      ever observes. Where do you think that I have been?”

      “A fixture also.”

      “On the contrary, I have been to Devonshire.”

      “In spirit?”

      “Exactly. My body has remained in this armchair and has, I regret
      to observe, consumed in my absence two large pots of coffee and
      an incredible amount of tobacco. After you left I sent down to
      Stamford’s for the Ordnance map of this portion of the moor, and
      my spirit has hovered over it all day. I flatter myself that I
      could find my way about.”

      “A large-scale map, I presume?”

      “Very large.”

      He unrolled one section and held it over his knee. “Here you have
      the particular district which concerns us. That is Baskerville
      Hall in the middle.”

      “With a wood round it?”

      “Exactly. I fancy the yew alley, though not marked under that
      name, must stretch along this line, with the moor, as you
      perceive, upon the right of it. This small clump of buildings
      here is the hamlet of Grimpen, where our friend Dr. Mortimer has
      his headquarters. Within a radius of five miles there are, as you
      see, only a very few scattered dwellings. Here is Lafter Hall,
      which was mentioned in the narrative. There is a house indicated
      here which may be the residence of the naturalist—Stapleton, if I
      remember right, was his name. Here are two moorland farmhouses,
      High Tor and Foulmire. Then fourteen miles away the great convict
      prison of Princetown. Between and around these scattered points
      extends the desolate, lifeless moor. This, then, is the stage
      upon which tragedy has been played, and upon which we may help to
      play it again.”

      “It must be a wild place.”

      “Yes, the setting is a worthy one. If the devil did desire to
      have a hand in the affairs of men—”

      “Then you are yourself inclining to the supernatural
      explanation.”

      “The devil’s agents may be of flesh and blood, may they not?
      There are two questions waiting for us at the outset. The one is
      whether any crime has been committed at all; the second is, what
      is the crime and how was it committed? Of course, if Dr.
      Mortimer’s surmise should be correct, and we are dealing with
      forces outside the ordinary laws of Nature, there is an end of
      our investigation. But we are bound to exhaust all other
      hypotheses before falling back upon this one. I think we’ll shut
      that window again, if you don’t mind. It is a singular thing, but
      I find that a concentrated atmosphere helps a concentration of
      thought. I have not pushed it to the length of getting into a box
      to think, but that is the logical outcome of my convictions. Have
      you turned the case over in your mind?”

      “Yes, I have thought a good deal of it in the course of the day.”

      “What do you make of it?”

      “It is very bewildering.”

      “It has certainly a character of its own. There are points of
      distinction about it. That change in the footprints, for example.
      What do you make of that?”

      “Mortimer said that the man had walked on tiptoe down that
      portion of the alley.”

      “He only repeated what some fool had said at the inquest. Why
      should a man walk on tiptoe down the alley?”

      “What then?”

      “He was running, Watson—running desperately, running for his
      life, running until he burst his heart—and fell dead upon his
      face.”

      “Running from what?”

      “There lies our problem. There are indications that the man was
      crazed with fear before ever he began to run.”

      “How can you say that?”

      “I am presuming that the cause of his fears came to him across
      the moor. If that were so, and it seems most probable, only a man
      who had lost his wits would have run _from_ the house instead of
      towards it. If the gipsy’s evidence may be taken as true, he ran
      with cries for help in the direction where help was least likely
      to be. Then, again, whom was he waiting for that night, and why
      was he waiting for him in the yew alley rather than in his own
      house?”

      “You think that he was waiting for someone?”

      “The man was elderly and infirm. We can understand his taking an
      evening stroll, but the ground was damp and the night inclement.
      Is it natural that he should stand for five or ten minutes, as
      Dr. Mortimer, with more practical sense than I should have given
      him credit for, deduced from the cigar ash?”

      “But he went out every evening.”

      “I think it unlikely that he waited at the moor-gate every
      evening. On the contrary, the evidence is that he avoided the
      moor. That night he waited there. It was the night before he made
      his departure for London. The thing takes shape, Watson. It
      becomes coherent. Might I ask you to hand me my violin, and we
      will postpone all further thought upon this business until we
      have had the advantage of meeting Dr. Mortimer and Sir Henry
      Baskerville in the morning.”




Chapter 4.
Sir Henry Baskerville


      Our breakfast table was cleared early, and Holmes waited in his
      dressing-gown for the promised interview. Our clients were
      punctual to their appointment, for the clock had just struck ten
      when Dr. Mortimer was shown up, followed by the young baronet.
      The latter was a small, alert, dark-eyed man about thirty years
      of age, very sturdily built, with thick black eyebrows and a
      strong, pugnacious face. He wore a ruddy-tinted tweed suit and
      had the weather-beaten appearance of one who has spent most of
      his time in the open air, and yet there was something in his
      steady eye and the quiet assurance of his bearing which indicated
      the gentleman.

      “This is Sir Henry Baskerville,” said Dr. Mortimer.

      “Why, yes,” said he, “and the strange thing is, Mr. Sherlock
      Holmes, that if my friend here had not proposed coming round to
      you this morning I should have come on my own account. I
      understand that you think out little puzzles, and I’ve had one
      this morning which wants more thinking out than I am able to give
      it.”

      “Pray take a seat, Sir Henry. Do I understand you to say that you
      have yourself had some remarkable experience since you arrived in
      London?”

      “Nothing of much importance, Mr. Holmes. Only a joke, as like as
      not. It was this letter, if you can call it a letter, which
      reached me this morning.”

      He laid an envelope upon the table, and we all bent over it. It
      was of common quality, greyish in colour. The address, “Sir Henry
      Baskerville, Northumberland Hotel,” was printed in rough
      characters; the post-mark “Charing Cross,” and the date of
      posting the preceding evening.

      “Who knew that you were going to the Northumberland Hotel?” asked
      Holmes, glancing keenly across at our visitor.

      “No one could have known. We only decided after I met Dr.
      Mortimer.”

      “But Dr. Mortimer was no doubt already stopping there?”

      “No, I had been staying with a friend,” said the doctor.

      “There was no possible indication that we intended to go to this
      hotel.”

      “Hum! Someone seems to be very deeply interested in your
      movements.” Out of the envelope he took a half-sheet of foolscap
      paper folded into four. This he opened and spread flat upon the
      table. Across the middle of it a single sentence had been formed
      by the expedient of pasting printed words upon it. It ran:

        As you value your life or your reason keep away from the moor.

      The word “moor” only was printed in ink.

      “Now,” said Sir Henry Baskerville, “perhaps you will tell me, Mr.
      Holmes, what in thunder is the meaning of that, and who it is
      that takes so much interest in my affairs?”

      “What do you make of it, Dr. Mortimer? You must allow that there
      is nothing supernatural about this, at any rate?”

      “No, sir, but it might very well come from someone who was
      convinced that the business is supernatural.”

      “What business?” asked Sir Henry sharply. “It seems to me that
      all you gentlemen know a great deal more than I do about my own
      affairs.”

      “You shall share our knowledge before you leave this room, Sir
      Henry. I promise you that,” said Sherlock Holmes. “We will
      confine ourselves for the present with your permission to this
      very interesting document, which must have been put together and
      posted yesterday evening. Have you yesterday’s _Times_, Watson?”

      “It is here in the corner.”

      “Might I trouble you for it—the inside page, please, with the
      leading articles?” He glanced swiftly over it, running his eyes
      up and down the columns. “Capital article this on free trade.
      Permit me to give you an extract from it.

     ‘You may be cajoled into imagining that your own special trade or
     your own industry will be encouraged by a protective tariff, but
     it stands to reason that such legislation must in the long run
     keep away wealth from the country, diminish the value of our
     imports, and lower the general conditions of life in this island.’

      “What do you think of that, Watson?” cried Holmes in high glee,
      rubbing his hands together with satisfaction. “Don’t you think
      that is an admirable sentiment?”

      Dr. Mortimer looked at Holmes with an air of professional
      interest, and Sir Henry Baskerville turned a pair of puzzled dark
      eyes upon me.

      “I don’t know much about the tariff and things of that kind,”
      said he, “but it seems to me we’ve got a bit off the trail so far
      as that note is concerned.”

      “On the contrary, I think we are particularly hot upon the trail,
      Sir Henry. Watson here knows more about my methods than you do,
      but I fear that even he has not quite grasped the significance of
      this sentence.”

      “No, I confess that I see no connection.”

      “And yet, my dear Watson, there is so very close a connection
      that the one is extracted out of the other. ‘You,’ ‘your,’
      ‘your,’ ‘life,’ ‘reason,’ ‘value,’ ‘keep away,’ ‘from the.’ Don’t
      you see now whence these words have been taken?”

      “By thunder, you’re right! Well, if that isn’t smart!” cried Sir
      Henry.

      “If any possible doubt remained it is settled by the fact that
      ‘keep away’ and ‘from the’ are cut out in one piece.”

      “Well, now—so it is!”

      “Really, Mr. Holmes, this exceeds anything which I could have
      imagined,” said Dr. Mortimer, gazing at my friend in amazement.
      “I could understand anyone saying that the words were from a
      newspaper; but that you should name which, and add that it came
      from the leading article, is really one of the most remarkable
      things which I have ever known. How did you do it?”

      “I presume, Doctor, that you could tell the skull of a negro from
      that of an Esquimau?”

      “Most certainly.”

      “But how?”

      “Because that is my special hobby. The differences are obvious.
      The supra-orbital crest, the facial angle, the maxillary curve,
      the—”

      “But this is my special hobby, and the differences are equally
      obvious. There is as much difference to my eyes between the
      leaded bourgeois type of a _Times_ article and the slovenly print
      of an evening half-penny paper as there could be between your
      negro and your Esquimau. The detection of types is one of the
      most elementary branches of knowledge to the special expert in
      crime, though I confess that once when I was very young I
      confused the _Leeds Mercury_ with the _Western Morning News_. But
      a _Times_ leader is entirely distinctive, and these words could
      have been taken from nothing else. As it was done yesterday the
      strong probability was that we should find the words in
      yesterday’s issue.”

      “So far as I can follow you, then, Mr. Holmes,” said Sir Henry
      Baskerville, “someone cut out this message with a scissors—”

      “Nail-scissors,” said Holmes. “You can see that it was a very
      short-bladed scissors, since the cutter had to take two snips
      over ‘keep away.’”

      “That is so. Someone, then, cut out the message with a pair of
      short-bladed scissors, pasted it with paste—”

      “Gum,” said Holmes.

      “With gum on to the paper. But I want to know why the word ‘moor’
      should have been written?”

      “Because he could not find it in print. The other words were all
      simple and might be found in any issue, but ‘moor’ would be less
      common.”

      “Why, of course, that would explain it. Have you read anything
      else in this message, Mr. Holmes?”

      “There are one or two indications, and yet the utmost pains have
      been taken to remove all clues. The address, you observe is
      printed in rough characters. But the _Times_ is a paper which is
      seldom found in any hands but those of the highly educated. We
      may take it, therefore, that the letter was composed by an
      educated man who wished to pose as an uneducated one, and his
      effort to conceal his own writing suggests that that writing
      might be known, or come to be known, by you. Again, you will
      observe that the words are not gummed on in an accurate line, but
      that some are much higher than others. ‘Life,’ for example is
      quite out of its proper place. That may point to carelessness or
      it may point to agitation and hurry upon the part of the cutter.
      On the whole I incline to the latter view, since the matter was
      evidently important, and it is unlikely that the composer of such
      a letter would be careless. If he were in a hurry it opens up the
      interesting question why he should be in a hurry, since any
      letter posted up to early morning would reach Sir Henry before he
      would leave his hotel. Did the composer fear an interruption—and
      from whom?”

      “We are coming now rather into the region of guesswork,” said Dr.
      Mortimer.

      “Say, rather, into the region where we balance probabilities and
      choose the most likely. It is the scientific use of the
      imagination, but we have always some material basis on which to
      start our speculation. Now, you would call it a guess, no doubt,
      but I am almost certain that this address has been written in a
      hotel.”

      “How in the world can you say that?”

      “If you examine it carefully you will see that both the pen and
      the ink have given the writer trouble. The pen has spluttered
      twice in a single word and has run dry three times in a short
      address, showing that there was very little ink in the bottle.
      Now, a private pen or ink-bottle is seldom allowed to be in such
      a state, and the combination of the two must be quite rare. But
      you know the hotel ink and the hotel pen, where it is rare to get
      anything else. Yes, I have very little hesitation in saying that
      could we examine the waste-paper baskets of the hotels around
      Charing Cross until we found the remains of the mutilated _Times_
      leader we could lay our hands straight upon the person who sent
      this singular message. Halloa! Halloa! What’s this?”

      He was carefully examining the foolscap, upon which the words
      were pasted, holding it only an inch or two from his eyes.

      “Well?”

      “Nothing,” said he, throwing it down. “It is a blank half-sheet
      of paper, without even a water-mark upon it. I think we have
      drawn as much as we can from this curious letter; and now, Sir
      Henry, has anything else of interest happened to you since you
      have been in London?”

      “Why, no, Mr. Holmes. I think not.”

      “You have not observed anyone follow or watch you?”

      “I seem to have walked right into the thick of a dime novel,”
      said our visitor. “Why in thunder should anyone follow or watch
      me?”

      “We are coming to that. You have nothing else to report to us
      before we go into this matter?”

      “Well, it depends upon what you think worth reporting.”

      “I think anything out of the ordinary routine of life well worth
      reporting.”

      Sir Henry smiled. “I don’t know much of British life yet, for I
      have spent nearly all my time in the States and in Canada. But I
      hope that to lose one of your boots is not part of the ordinary
      routine of life over here.”

      “You have lost one of your boots?”

      “My dear sir,” cried Dr. Mortimer, “it is only mislaid. You will
      find it when you return to the hotel. What is the use of
      troubling Mr. Holmes with trifles of this kind?”

      “Well, he asked me for anything outside the ordinary routine.”

      “Exactly,” said Holmes, “however foolish the incident may seem.
      You have lost one of your boots, you say?”

      “Well, mislaid it, anyhow. I put them both outside my door last
      night, and there was only one in the morning. I could get no
      sense out of the chap who cleans them. The worst of it is that I
      only bought the pair last night in the Strand, and I have never
      had them on.”

      “If you have never worn them, why did you put them out to be
      cleaned?”

      “They were tan boots and had never been varnished. That was why I
      put them out.”

      “Then I understand that on your arrival in London yesterday you
      went out at once and bought a pair of boots?”

      “I did a good deal of shopping. Dr. Mortimer here went round with
      me. You see, if I am to be squire down there I must dress the
      part, and it may be that I have got a little careless in my ways
      out West. Among other things I bought these brown boots—gave six
      dollars for them—and had one stolen before ever I had them on my
      feet.”

      “It seems a singularly useless thing to steal,” said Sherlock
      Holmes. “I confess that I share Dr. Mortimer’s belief that it
      will not be long before the missing boot is found.”

      “And, now, gentlemen,” said the baronet with decision, “it seems
      to me that I have spoken quite enough about the little that I
      know. It is time that you kept your promise and gave me a full
      account of what we are all driving at.”

      “Your request is a very reasonable one,” Holmes answered. “Dr.
      Mortimer, I think you could not do better than to tell your story
      as you told it to us.”

      Thus encouraged, our scientific friend drew his papers from his
      pocket and presented the whole case as he had done upon the
      morning before. Sir Henry Baskerville listened with the deepest
      attention and with an occasional exclamation of surprise.

      “Well, I seem to have come into an inheritance with a vengeance,”
      said he when the long narrative was finished. “Of course, I’ve
      heard of the hound ever since I was in the nursery. It’s the pet
      story of the family, though I never thought of taking it
      seriously before. But as to my uncle’s death—well, it all seems
      boiling up in my head, and I can’t get it clear yet. You don’t
      seem quite to have made up your mind whether it’s a case for a
      policeman or a clergyman.”

      “Precisely.”

      “And now there’s this affair of the letter to me at the hotel. I
      suppose that fits into its place.”

      “It seems to show that someone knows more than we do about what
      goes on upon the moor,” said Dr. Mortimer.

      “And also,” said Holmes, “that someone is not ill-disposed
      towards you, since they warn you of danger.”

      “Or it may be that they wish, for their own purposes, to scare me
      away.”

      “Well, of course, that is possible also. I am very much indebted
      to you, Dr. Mortimer, for introducing me to a problem which
      presents several interesting alternatives. But the practical
      point which we now have to decide, Sir Henry, is whether it is or
      is not advisable for you to go to Baskerville Hall.”

      “Why should I not go?”

      “There seems to be danger.”

      “Do you mean danger from this family fiend or do you mean danger
      from human beings?”

      “Well, that is what we have to find out.”

      “Whichever it is, my answer is fixed. There is no devil in hell,
      Mr. Holmes, and there is no man upon earth who can prevent me
      from going to the home of my own people, and you may take that to
      be my final answer.” His dark brows knitted and his face flushed
      to a dusky red as he spoke. It was evident that the fiery temper
      of the Baskervilles was not extinct in this their last
      representative. “Meanwhile,” said he, “I have hardly had time to
      think over all that you have told me. It’s a big thing for a man
      to have to understand and to decide at one sitting. I should like
      to have a quiet hour by myself to make up my mind. Now, look
      here, Mr. Holmes, it’s half-past eleven now and I am going back
      right away to my hotel. Suppose you and your friend, Dr. Watson,
      come round and lunch with us at two. I’ll be able to tell you
      more clearly then how this thing strikes me.”

      “Is that convenient to you, Watson?”

      “Perfectly.”

      “Then you may expect us. Shall I have a cab called?”

      “I’d prefer to walk, for this affair has flurried me rather.”

      “I’ll join you in a walk, with pleasure,” said his companion.

      “Then we meet again at two o’clock. Au revoir, and good-morning!”

      We heard the steps of our visitors descend the stair and the bang
      of the front door. In an instant Holmes had changed from the
      languid dreamer to the man of action.

      “Your hat and boots, Watson, quick! Not a moment to lose!” He
      rushed into his room in his dressing-gown and was back again in a
      few seconds in a frock-coat. We hurried together down the stairs
      and into the street. Dr. Mortimer and Baskerville were still
      visible about two hundred yards ahead of us in the direction of
      Oxford Street.

      “Shall I run on and stop them?”

      “Not for the world, my dear Watson. I am perfectly satisfied with
      your company if you will tolerate mine. Our friends are wise, for
      it is certainly a very fine morning for a walk.”

      He quickened his pace until we had decreased the distance which
      divided us by about half. Then, still keeping a hundred yards
      behind, we followed into Oxford Street and so down Regent Street.
      Once our friends stopped and stared into a shop window, upon
      which Holmes did the same. An instant afterwards he gave a little
      cry of satisfaction, and, following the direction of his eager
      eyes, I saw that a hansom cab with a man inside which had halted
      on the other side of the street was now proceeding slowly onward
      again.

      “There’s our man, Watson! Come along! We’ll have a good look at
      him, if we can do no more.”

      At that instant I was aware of a bushy black beard and a pair of
      piercing eyes turned upon us through the side window of the cab.
      Instantly the trapdoor at the top flew up, something was screamed
      to the driver, and the cab flew madly off down Regent Street.
      Holmes looked eagerly round for another, but no empty one was in
      sight. Then he dashed in wild pursuit amid the stream of the
      traffic, but the start was too great, and already the cab was out
      of sight.

      “There now!” said Holmes bitterly as he emerged panting and white
      with vexation from the tide of vehicles. “Was ever such bad luck
      and such bad management, too? Watson, Watson, if you are an
      honest man you will record this also and set it against my
      successes!”

      “Who was the man?”

      “I have not an idea.”

      “A spy?”

      “Well, it was evident from what we have heard that Baskerville
      has been very closely shadowed by someone since he has been in
      town. How else could it be known so quickly that it was the
      Northumberland Hotel which he had chosen? If they had followed
      him the first day I argued that they would follow him also the
      second. You may have observed that I twice strolled over to the
      window while Dr. Mortimer was reading his legend.”

      “Yes, I remember.”

      “I was looking out for loiterers in the street, but I saw none.
      We are dealing with a clever man, Watson. This matter cuts very
      deep, and though I have not finally made up my mind whether it is
      a benevolent or a malevolent agency which is in touch with us, I
      am conscious always of power and design. When our friends left I
      at once followed them in the hopes of marking down their
      invisible attendant. So wily was he that he had not trusted
      himself upon foot, but he had availed himself of a cab so that he
      could loiter behind or dash past them and so escape their notice.
      His method had the additional advantage that if they were to take
      a cab he was all ready to follow them. It has, however, one
      obvious disadvantage.”

      “It puts him in the power of the cabman.”

      “Exactly.”

      “What a pity we did not get the number!”

      “My dear Watson, clumsy as I have been, you surely do not
      seriously imagine that I neglected to get the number? No. 2704 is
      our man. But that is no use to us for the moment.”

      “I fail to see how you could have done more.”

      “On observing the cab I should have instantly turned and walked
      in the other direction. I should then at my leisure have hired a
      second cab and followed the first at a respectful distance, or,
      better still, have driven to the Northumberland Hotel and waited
      there. When our unknown had followed Baskerville home we should
      have had the opportunity of playing his own game upon himself and
      seeing where he made for. As it is, by an indiscreet eagerness,
      which was taken advantage of with extraordinary quickness and
      energy by our opponent, we have betrayed ourselves and lost our
      man.”

      We had been sauntering slowly down Regent Street during this
      conversation, and Dr. Mortimer, with his companion, had long
      vanished in front of us.

      “There is no object in our following them,” said Holmes. “The
      shadow has departed and will not return. We must see what further
      cards we have in our hands and play them with decision. Could you
      swear to that man’s face within the cab?”

      “I could swear only to the beard.”

      “And so could I—from which I gather that in all probability it
      was a false one. A clever man upon so delicate an errand has no
      use for a beard save to conceal his features. Come in here,
      Watson!”

      He turned into one of the district messenger offices, where he
      was warmly greeted by the manager.

      “Ah, Wilson, I see you have not forgotten the little case in
      which I had the good fortune to help you?”

      “No, sir, indeed I have not. You saved my good name, and perhaps
      my life.”

      “My dear fellow, you exaggerate. I have some recollection,
      Wilson, that you had among your boys a lad named Cartwright, who
      showed some ability during the investigation.”

      “Yes, sir, he is still with us.”

      “Could you ring him up?—thank you! And I should be glad to have
      change of this five-pound note.”

      A lad of fourteen, with a bright, keen face, had obeyed the
      summons of the manager. He stood now gazing with great reverence
      at the famous detective.

      “Let me have the Hotel Directory,” said Holmes. “Thank you! Now,
      Cartwright, there are the names of twenty-three hotels here, all
      in the immediate neighbourhood of Charing Cross. Do you see?”

      “Yes, sir.”

      “You will visit each of these in turn.”

      “Yes, sir.”

      “You will begin in each case by giving the outside porter one
      shilling. Here are twenty-three shillings.”

      “Yes, sir.”

      “You will tell him that you want to see the waste-paper of
      yesterday. You will say that an important telegram has miscarried
      and that you are looking for it. You understand?”

      “Yes, sir.”

      “But what you are really looking for is the centre page of the
      _Times_ with some holes cut in it with scissors. Here is a copy
      of the _Times_. It is this page. You could easily recognize it,
      could you not?”

      “Yes, sir.”

      “In each case the outside porter will send for the hall porter,
      to whom also you will give a shilling. Here are twenty-three
      shillings. You will then learn in possibly twenty cases out of
      the twenty-three that the waste of the day before has been burned
      or removed. In the three other cases you will be shown a heap of
      paper and you will look for this page of the _Times_ among it.
      The odds are enormously against your finding it. There are ten
      shillings over in case of emergencies. Let me have a report by
      wire at Baker Street before evening. And now, Watson, it only
      remains for us to find out by wire the identity of the cabman,
      No. 2704, and then we will drop into one of the Bond Street
      picture galleries and fill in the time until we are due at the
      hotel.”




Chapter 5.
Three Broken Threads


      Sherlock Holmes had, in a very remarkable degree, the power of
      detaching his mind at will. For two hours the strange business in
      which we had been involved appeared to be forgotten, and he was
      entirely absorbed in the pictures of the modern Belgian masters.
      He would talk of nothing but art, of which he had the crudest
      ideas, from our leaving the gallery until we found ourselves at
      the Northumberland Hotel.

      “Sir Henry Baskerville is upstairs expecting you,” said the
      clerk. “He asked me to show you up at once when you came.”

      “Have you any objection to my looking at your register?” said
      Holmes.

      “Not in the least.”

      The book showed that two names had been added after that of
      Baskerville. One was Theophilus Johnson and family, of Newcastle;
      the other Mrs. Oldmore and maid, of High Lodge, Alton.

      “Surely that must be the same Johnson whom I used to know,” said
      Holmes to the porter. “A lawyer, is he not, grey-headed, and
      walks with a limp?”

      “No, sir, this is Mr. Johnson, the coal-owner, a very active
      gentleman, not older than yourself.”

      “Surely you are mistaken about his trade?”

      “No, sir! he has used this hotel for many years, and he is very
      well known to us.”

      “Ah, that settles it. Mrs. Oldmore, too; I seem to remember the
      name. Excuse my curiosity, but often in calling upon one friend
      one finds another.”

      “She is an invalid lady, sir. Her husband was once mayor of
      Gloucester. She always comes to us when she is in town.”

      “Thank you; I am afraid I cannot claim her acquaintance. We have
      established a most important fact by these questions, Watson,” he
      continued in a low voice as we went upstairs together. “We know
      now that the people who are so interested in our friend have not
      settled down in his own hotel. That means that while they are, as
      we have seen, very anxious to watch him, they are equally anxious
      that he should not see them. Now, this is a most suggestive
      fact.”

      “What does it suggest?”

      “It suggests—halloa, my dear fellow, what on earth is the
      matter?”

      As we came round the top of the stairs we had run up against Sir
      Henry Baskerville himself. His face was flushed with anger, and
      he held an old and dusty boot in one of his hands. So furious was
      he that he was hardly articulate, and when he did speak it was in
      a much broader and more Western dialect than any which we had
      heard from him in the morning.

      “Seems to me they are playing me for a sucker in this hotel,” he
      cried. “They’ll find they’ve started in to monkey with the wrong
      man unless they are careful. By thunder, if that chap can’t find
      my missing boot there will be trouble. I can take a joke with the
      best, Mr. Holmes, but they’ve got a bit over the mark this time.”

      “Still looking for your boot?”

      “Yes, sir, and mean to find it.”

      “But, surely, you said that it was a new brown boot?”

      “So it was, sir. And now it’s an old black one.”

      “What! you don’t mean to say—?”

      “That’s just what I do mean to say. I only had three pairs in the
      world—the new brown, the old black, and the patent leathers,
      which I am wearing. Last night they took one of my brown ones,
      and today they have sneaked one of the black. Well, have you got
      it? Speak out, man, and don’t stand staring!”

      An agitated German waiter had appeared upon the scene.

      “No, sir; I have made inquiry all over the hotel, but I can hear
      no word of it.”

      “Well, either that boot comes back before sundown or I’ll see the
      manager and tell him that I go right straight out of this hotel.”

      “It shall be found, sir—I promise you that if you will have a
      little patience it will be found.”

      “Mind it is, for it’s the last thing of mine that I’ll lose in
      this den of thieves. Well, well, Mr. Holmes, you’ll excuse my
      troubling you about such a trifle—”

      “I think it’s well worth troubling about.”

      “Why, you look very serious over it.”

      “How do you explain it?”

      “I just don’t attempt to explain it. It seems the very maddest,
      queerest thing that ever happened to me.”

      “The queerest perhaps—” said Holmes thoughtfully.

      “What do you make of it yourself?”

      “Well, I don’t profess to understand it yet. This case of yours
      is very complex, Sir Henry. When taken in conjunction with your
      uncle’s death I am not sure that of all the five hundred cases of
      capital importance which I have handled there is one which cuts
      so deep. But we hold several threads in our hands, and the odds
      are that one or other of them guides us to the truth. We may
      waste time in following the wrong one, but sooner or later we
      must come upon the right.”

      We had a pleasant luncheon in which little was said of the
      business which had brought us together. It was in the private
      sitting-room to which we afterwards repaired that Holmes asked
      Baskerville what were his intentions.

      “To go to Baskerville Hall.”

      “And when?”

      “At the end of the week.”

      “On the whole,” said Holmes, “I think that your decision is a
      wise one. I have ample evidence that you are being dogged in
      London, and amid the millions of this great city it is difficult
      to discover who these people are or what their object can be. If
      their intentions are evil they might do you a mischief, and we
      should be powerless to prevent it. You did not know, Dr.
      Mortimer, that you were followed this morning from my house?”

      Dr. Mortimer started violently. “Followed! By whom?”

      “That, unfortunately, is what I cannot tell you. Have you among
      your neighbours or acquaintances on Dartmoor any man with a
      black, full beard?”

      “No—or, let me see—why, yes. Barrymore, Sir Charles’s butler, is
      a man with a full, black beard.”

      “Ha! Where is Barrymore?”

      “He is in charge of the Hall.”

      “We had best ascertain if he is really there, or if by any
      possibility he might be in London.”

      “How can you do that?”

      “Give me a telegraph form. ‘Is all ready for Sir Henry?’ That
      will do. Address to Mr. Barrymore, Baskerville Hall. What is the
      nearest telegraph-office? Grimpen. Very good, we will send a
      second wire to the postmaster, Grimpen: ‘Telegram to Mr.
      Barrymore to be delivered into his own hand. If absent, please
      return wire to Sir Henry Baskerville, Northumberland Hotel.’ That
      should let us know before evening whether Barrymore is at his
      post in Devonshire or not.”

      “That’s so,” said Baskerville. “By the way, Dr. Mortimer, who is
      this Barrymore, anyhow?”

      “He is the son of the old caretaker, who is dead. They have
      looked after the Hall for four generations now. So far as I know,
      he and his wife are as respectable a couple as any in the
      county.”

      “At the same time,” said Baskerville, “it’s clear enough that so
      long as there are none of the family at the Hall these people
      have a mighty fine home and nothing to do.”

      “That is true.”

      “Did Barrymore profit at all by Sir Charles’s will?” asked
      Holmes.

      “He and his wife had five hundred pounds each.”

      “Ha! Did they know that they would receive this?”

      “Yes; Sir Charles was very fond of talking about the provisions
      of his will.”

      “That is very interesting.”

      “I hope,” said Dr. Mortimer, “that you do not look with
      suspicious eyes upon everyone who received a legacy from Sir
      Charles, for I also had a thousand pounds left to me.”

      “Indeed! And anyone else?”

      “There were many insignificant sums to individuals, and a large
      number of public charities. The residue all went to Sir Henry.”

      “And how much was the residue?”

      “Seven hundred and forty thousand pounds.”

      Holmes raised his eyebrows in surprise. “I had no idea that so
      gigantic a sum was involved,” said he.

      “Sir Charles had the reputation of being rich, but we did not
      know how very rich he was until we came to examine his
      securities. The total value of the estate was close on to a
      million.”

      “Dear me! It is a stake for which a man might well play a
      desperate game. And one more question, Dr. Mortimer. Supposing
      that anything happened to our young friend here—you will forgive
      the unpleasant hypothesis!—who would inherit the estate?”

      “Since Rodger Baskerville, Sir Charles’s younger brother died
      unmarried, the estate would descend to the Desmonds, who are
      distant cousins. James Desmond is an elderly clergyman in
      Westmoreland.”

      “Thank you. These details are all of great interest. Have you met
      Mr. James Desmond?”

      “Yes; he once came down to visit Sir Charles. He is a man of
      venerable appearance and of saintly life. I remember that he
      refused to accept any settlement from Sir Charles, though he
      pressed it upon him.”

      “And this man of simple tastes would be the heir to Sir Charles’s
      thousands.”

      “He would be the heir to the estate because that is entailed. He
      would also be the heir to the money unless it were willed
      otherwise by the present owner, who can, of course, do what he
      likes with it.”

      “And have you made your will, Sir Henry?”

      “No, Mr. Holmes, I have not. I’ve had no time, for it was only
      yesterday that I learned how matters stood. But in any case I
      feel that the money should go with the title and estate. That was
      my poor uncle’s idea. How is the owner going to restore the
      glories of the Baskervilles if he has not money enough to keep up
      the property? House, land, and dollars must go together.”

      “Quite so. Well, Sir Henry, I am of one mind with you as to the
      advisability of your going down to Devonshire without delay.
      There is only one provision which I must make. You certainly must
      not go alone.”

      “Dr. Mortimer returns with me.”

      “But Dr. Mortimer has his practice to attend to, and his house is
      miles away from yours. With all the goodwill in the world he may
      be unable to help you. No, Sir Henry, you must take with you
      someone, a trusty man, who will be always by your side.”

      “Is it possible that you could come yourself, Mr. Holmes?”

      “If matters came to a crisis I should endeavour to be present in
      person; but you can understand that, with my extensive consulting
      practice and with the constant appeals which reach me from many
      quarters, it is impossible for me to be absent from London for an
      indefinite time. At the present instant one of the most revered
      names in England is being besmirched by a blackmailer, and only I
      can stop a disastrous scandal. You will see how impossible it is
      for me to go to Dartmoor.”

      “Whom would you recommend, then?”

      Holmes laid his hand upon my arm. “If my friend would undertake
      it there is no man who is better worth having at your side when
      you are in a tight place. No one can say so more confidently than
      I.”

      The proposition took me completely by surprise, but before I had
      time to answer, Baskerville seized me by the hand and wrung it
      heartily.

      “Well, now, that is real kind of you, Dr. Watson,” said he. “You
      see how it is with me, and you know just as much about the matter
      as I do. If you will come down to Baskerville Hall and see me
      through I’ll never forget it.”

      The promise of adventure had always a fascination for me, and I
      was complimented by the words of Holmes and by the eagerness with
      which the baronet hailed me as a companion.

      “I will come, with pleasure,” said I. “I do not know how I could
      employ my time better.”

      “And you will report very carefully to me,” said Holmes. “When a
      crisis comes, as it will do, I will direct how you shall act. I
      suppose that by Saturday all might be ready?”

      “Would that suit Dr. Watson?”

      “Perfectly.”

      “Then on Saturday, unless you hear to the contrary, we shall meet
      at the ten-thirty train from Paddington.”

      We had risen to depart when Baskerville gave a cry of triumph,
      and diving into one of the corners of the room he drew a brown
      boot from under a cabinet.

      “My missing boot!” he cried.

      “May all our difficulties vanish as easily!” said Sherlock
      Holmes.

      “But it is a very singular thing,” Dr. Mortimer remarked. “I
      searched this room carefully before lunch.”

      “And so did I,” said Baskerville. “Every inch of it.”

      “There was certainly no boot in it then.”

      “In that case the waiter must have placed it there while we were
      lunching.”

      The German was sent for but professed to know nothing of the
      matter, nor could any inquiry clear it up. Another item had been
      added to that constant and apparently purposeless series of small
      mysteries which had succeeded each other so rapidly. Setting
      aside the whole grim story of Sir Charles’s death, we had a line
      of inexplicable incidents all within the limits of two days,
      which included the receipt of the printed letter, the
      black-bearded spy in the hansom, the loss of the new brown boot,
      the loss of the old black boot, and now the return of the new
      brown boot. Holmes sat in silence in the cab as we drove back to
      Baker Street, and I knew from his drawn brows and keen face that
      his mind, like my own, was busy in endeavouring to frame some
      scheme into which all these strange and apparently disconnected
      episodes could be fitted. All afternoon and late into the evening
      he sat lost in tobacco and thought.

      Just before dinner two telegrams were handed in. The first ran:

      Have just heard that Barrymore is at the Hall. BASKERVILLE.

      The second:

      Visited twenty-three hotels as directed, but sorry to report
      unable to trace cut sheet of _Times_. CARTWRIGHT.

      “There go two of my threads, Watson. There is nothing more
      stimulating than a case where everything goes against you. We
      must cast round for another scent.”

      “We have still the cabman who drove the spy.”

      “Exactly. I have wired to get his name and address from the
      Official Registry. I should not be surprised if this were an
      answer to my question.”

      The ring at the bell proved to be something even more
      satisfactory than an answer, however, for the door opened and a
      rough-looking fellow entered who was evidently the man himself.

      “I got a message from the head office that a gent at this address
      had been inquiring for No. 2704,” said he. “I’ve driven my cab
      this seven years and never a word of complaint. I came here
      straight from the Yard to ask you to your face what you had
      against me.”

      “I have nothing in the world against you, my good man,” said
      Holmes. “On the contrary, I have half a sovereign for you if you
      will give me a clear answer to my questions.”

      “Well, I’ve had a good day and no mistake,” said the cabman with
      a grin. “What was it you wanted to ask, sir?”

      “First of all your name and address, in case I want you again.”

      “John Clayton, 3 Turpey Street, the Borough. My cab is out of
      Shipley’s Yard, near Waterloo Station.”

      Sherlock Holmes made a note of it.

      “Now, Clayton, tell me all about the fare who came and watched
      this house at ten o’clock this morning and afterwards followed
      the two gentlemen down Regent Street.”

      The man looked surprised and a little embarrassed. “Why, there’s
      no good my telling you things, for you seem to know as much as I
      do already,” said he. “The truth is that the gentleman told me
      that he was a detective and that I was to say nothing about him
      to anyone.”

      “My good fellow; this is a very serious business, and you may
      find yourself in a pretty bad position if you try to hide
      anything from me. You say that your fare told you that he was a
      detective?”

      “Yes, he did.”

      “When did he say this?”

      “When he left me.”

      “Did he say anything more?”

      “He mentioned his name.”

      Holmes cast a swift glance of triumph at me. “Oh, he mentioned
      his name, did he? That was imprudent. What was the name that he
      mentioned?”

      “His name,” said the cabman, “was Mr. Sherlock Holmes.”

      Never have I seen my friend more completely taken aback than by
      the cabman’s reply. For an instant he sat in silent amazement.
      Then he burst into a hearty laugh.

      “A touch, Watson—an undeniable touch!” said he. “I feel a foil as
      quick and supple as my own. He got home upon me very prettily
      that time. So his name was Sherlock Holmes, was it?”

      “Yes, sir, that was the gentleman’s name.”

      “Excellent! Tell me where you picked him up and all that
      occurred.”

      “He hailed me at half-past nine in Trafalgar Square. He said that
      he was a detective, and he offered me two guineas if I would do
      exactly what he wanted all day and ask no questions. I was glad
      enough to agree. First we drove down to the Northumberland Hotel
      and waited there until two gentlemen came out and took a cab from
      the rank. We followed their cab until it pulled up somewhere near
      here.”

      “This very door,” said Holmes.

      “Well, I couldn’t be sure of that, but I dare say my fare knew
      all about it. We pulled up halfway down the street and waited an
      hour and a half. Then the two gentlemen passed us, walking, and
      we followed down Baker Street and along—”

      “I know,” said Holmes.

      “Until we got three-quarters down Regent Street. Then my
      gentleman threw up the trap, and he cried that I should drive
      right away to Waterloo Station as hard as I could go. I whipped
      up the mare and we were there under the ten minutes. Then he paid
      up his two guineas, like a good one, and away he went into the
      station. Only just as he was leaving he turned round and he said:
      ‘It might interest you to know that you have been driving Mr.
      Sherlock Holmes.’ That’s how I come to know the name.”

      “I see. And you saw no more of him?”

      “Not after he went into the station.”

      “And how would you describe Mr. Sherlock Holmes?”

      The cabman scratched his head. “Well, he wasn’t altogether such
      an easy gentleman to describe. I’d put him at forty years of age,
      and he was of a middle height, two or three inches shorter than
      you, sir. He was dressed like a toff, and he had a black beard,
      cut square at the end, and a pale face. I don’t know as I could
      say more than that.”

      “Colour of his eyes?”

      “No, I can’t say that.”

      “Nothing more that you can remember?”

      “No, sir; nothing.”

      “Well, then, here is your half-sovereign. There’s another one
      waiting for you if you can bring any more information.
      Good-night!”

      “Good-night, sir, and thank you!”

      John Clayton departed chuckling, and Holmes turned to me with a
      shrug of his shoulders and a rueful smile.

      “Snap goes our third thread, and we end where we began,” said he.
      “The cunning rascal! He knew our number, knew that Sir Henry
      Baskerville had consulted me, spotted who I was in Regent Street,
      conjectured that I had got the number of the cab and would lay my
      hands on the driver, and so sent back this audacious message. I
      tell you, Watson, this time we have got a foeman who is worthy of
      our steel. I’ve been checkmated in London. I can only wish you
      better luck in Devonshire. But I’m not easy in my mind about it.”

      “About what?”

      “About sending you. It’s an ugly business, Watson, an ugly
      dangerous business, and the more I see of it the less I like it.
      Yes, my dear fellow, you may laugh, but I give you my word that I
      shall be very glad to have you back safe and sound in Baker
      Street once more.”




Chapter 6.
Baskerville Hall


      Sir Henry Baskerville and Dr. Mortimer were ready upon the
      appointed day, and we started as arranged for Devonshire. Mr.
      Sherlock Holmes drove with me to the station and gave me his last
      parting injunctions and advice.

      “I will not bias your mind by suggesting theories or suspicions,
      Watson,” said he; “I wish you simply to report facts in the
      fullest possible manner to me, and you can leave me to do the
      theorizing.”

      “What sort of facts?” I asked.

      “Anything which may seem to have a bearing however indirect upon
      the case, and especially the relations between young Baskerville
      and his neighbours or any fresh particulars concerning the death
      of Sir Charles. I have made some inquiries myself in the last few
      days, but the results have, I fear, been negative. One thing only
      appears to be certain, and that is that Mr. James Desmond, who is
      the next heir, is an elderly gentleman of a very amiable
      disposition, so that this persecution does not arise from him. I
      really think that we may eliminate him entirely from our
      calculations. There remain the people who will actually surround
      Sir Henry Baskerville upon the moor.”

      “Would it not be well in the first place to get rid of this
      Barrymore couple?”

      “By no means. You could not make a greater mistake. If they are
      innocent it would be a cruel injustice, and if they are guilty we
      should be giving up all chance of bringing it home to them. No,
      no, we will preserve them upon our list of suspects. Then there
      is a groom at the Hall, if I remember right. There are two
      moorland farmers. There is our friend Dr. Mortimer, whom I
      believe to be entirely honest, and there is his wife, of whom we
      know nothing. There is this naturalist, Stapleton, and there is
      his sister, who is said to be a young lady of attractions. There
      is Mr. Frankland, of Lafter Hall, who is also an unknown factor,
      and there are one or two other neighbours. These are the folk who
      must be your very special study.”

      “I will do my best.”

      “You have arms, I suppose?”

      “Yes, I thought it as well to take them.”

      “Most certainly. Keep your revolver near you night and day, and
      never relax your precautions.”

      Our friends had already secured a first-class carriage and were
      waiting for us upon the platform.

      “No, we have no news of any kind,” said Dr. Mortimer in answer to
      my friend’s questions. “I can swear to one thing, and that is
      that we have not been shadowed during the last two days. We have
      never gone out without keeping a sharp watch, and no one could
      have escaped our notice.”

      “You have always kept together, I presume?”

      “Except yesterday afternoon. I usually give up one day to pure
      amusement when I come to town, so I spent it at the Museum of the
      College of Surgeons.”

      “And I went to look at the folk in the park,” said Baskerville.

      “But we had no trouble of any kind.”

      “It was imprudent, all the same,” said Holmes, shaking his head
      and looking very grave. “I beg, Sir Henry, that you will not go
      about alone. Some great misfortune will befall you if you do. Did
      you get your other boot?”

      “No, sir, it is gone forever.”

      “Indeed. That is very interesting. Well, good-bye,” he added as
      the train began to glide down the platform. “Bear in mind, Sir
      Henry, one of the phrases in that queer old legend which Dr.
      Mortimer has read to us, and avoid the moor in those hours of
      darkness when the powers of evil are exalted.”

      I looked back at the platform when we had left it far behind and
      saw the tall, austere figure of Holmes standing motionless and
      gazing after us.

      The journey was a swift and pleasant one, and I spent it in
      making the more intimate acquaintance of my two companions and in
      playing with Dr. Mortimer’s spaniel. In a very few hours the
      brown earth had become ruddy, the brick had changed to granite,
      and red cows grazed in well-hedged fields where the lush grasses
      and more luxuriant vegetation spoke of a richer, if a damper,
      climate. Young Baskerville stared eagerly out of the window and
      cried aloud with delight as he recognized the familiar features
      of the Devon scenery.

      “I’ve been over a good part of the world since I left it, Dr.
      Watson,” said he; “but I have never seen a place to compare with
      it.”

      “I never saw a Devonshire man who did not swear by his county,” I
      remarked.

      “It depends upon the breed of men quite as much as on the
      county,” said Dr. Mortimer. “A glance at our friend here reveals
      the rounded head of the Celt, which carries inside it the Celtic
      enthusiasm and power of attachment. Poor Sir Charles’s head was
      of a very rare type, half Gaelic, half Ivernian in its
      characteristics. But you were very young when you last saw
      Baskerville Hall, were you not?”

      “I was a boy in my teens at the time of my father’s death and had
      never seen the Hall, for he lived in a little cottage on the
      South Coast. Thence I went straight to a friend in America. I
      tell you it is all as new to me as it is to Dr. Watson, and I’m
      as keen as possible to see the moor.”

      “Are you? Then your wish is easily granted, for there is your
      first sight of the moor,” said Dr. Mortimer, pointing out of the
      carriage window.

      Over the green squares of the fields and the low curve of a wood
      there rose in the distance a grey, melancholy hill, with a
      strange jagged summit, dim and vague in the distance, like some
      fantastic landscape in a dream. Baskerville sat for a long time,
      his eyes fixed upon it, and I read upon his eager face how much
      it meant to him, this first sight of that strange spot where the
      men of his blood had held sway so long and left their mark so
      deep. There he sat, with his tweed suit and his American accent,
      in the corner of a prosaic railway-carriage, and yet as I looked
      at his dark and expressive face I felt more than ever how true a
      descendant he was of that long line of high-blooded, fiery, and
      masterful men. There were pride, valour, and strength in his
      thick brows, his sensitive nostrils, and his large hazel eyes. If
      on that forbidding moor a difficult and dangerous quest should
      lie before us, this was at least a comrade for whom one might
      venture to take a risk with the certainty that he would bravely
      share it.

      The train pulled up at a small wayside station and we all
      descended. Outside, beyond the low, white fence, a wagonette with
      a pair of cobs was waiting. Our coming was evidently a great
      event, for station-master and porters clustered round us to carry
      out our luggage. It was a sweet, simple country spot, but I was
      surprised to observe that by the gate there stood two soldierly
      men in dark uniforms who leaned upon their short rifles and
      glanced keenly at us as we passed. The coachman, a hard-faced,
      gnarled little fellow, saluted Sir Henry Baskerville, and in a
      few minutes we were flying swiftly down the broad, white road.
      Rolling pasture lands curved upward on either side of us, and old
      gabled houses peeped out from amid the thick green foliage, but
      behind the peaceful and sunlit countryside there rose ever, dark
      against the evening sky, the long, gloomy curve of the moor,
      broken by the jagged and sinister hills.

      The wagonette swung round into a side road, and we curved upward
      through deep lanes worn by centuries of wheels, high banks on
      either side, heavy with dripping moss and fleshy hart’s-tongue
      ferns. Bronzing bracken and mottled bramble gleamed in the light
      of the sinking sun. Still steadily rising, we passed over a
      narrow granite bridge and skirted a noisy stream which gushed
      swiftly down, foaming and roaring amid the grey boulders. Both
      road and stream wound up through a valley dense with scrub oak
      and fir. At every turn Baskerville gave an exclamation of
      delight, looking eagerly about him and asking countless
      questions. To his eyes all seemed beautiful, but to me a tinge of
      melancholy lay upon the countryside, which bore so clearly the
      mark of the waning year. Yellow leaves carpeted the lanes and
      fluttered down upon us as we passed. The rattle of our wheels
      died away as we drove through drifts of rotting vegetation—sad
      gifts, as it seemed to me, for Nature to throw before the
      carriage of the returning heir of the Baskervilles.

      “Halloa!” cried Dr. Mortimer, “what is this?”

      A steep curve of heath-clad land, an outlying spur of the moor,
      lay in front of us. On the summit, hard and clear like an
      equestrian statue upon its pedestal, was a mounted soldier, dark
      and stern, his rifle poised ready over his forearm. He was
      watching the road along which we travelled.

      “What is this, Perkins?” asked Dr. Mortimer.

      Our driver half turned in his seat. “There’s a convict escaped
      from Princetown, sir. He’s been out three days now, and the
      warders watch every road and every station, but they’ve had no
      sight of him yet. The farmers about here don’t like it, sir, and
      that’s a fact.”

      “Well, I understand that they get five pounds if they can give
      information.”

      “Yes, sir, but the chance of five pounds is but a poor thing
      compared to the chance of having your throat cut. You see, it
      isn’t like any ordinary convict. This is a man that would stick
      at nothing.”

      “Who is he, then?”

      “It is Selden, the Notting Hill murderer.”

      I remembered the case well, for it was one in which Holmes had
      taken an interest on account of the peculiar ferocity of the
      crime and the wanton brutality which had marked all the actions
      of the assassin. The commutation of his death sentence had been
      due to some doubts as to his complete sanity, so atrocious was
      his conduct. Our wagonette had topped a rise and in front of us
      rose the huge expanse of the moor, mottled with gnarled and
      craggy cairns and tors. A cold wind swept down from it and set us
      shivering. Somewhere there, on that desolate plain, was lurking
      this fiendish man, hiding in a burrow like a wild beast, his
      heart full of malignancy against the whole race which had cast
      him out. It needed but this to complete the grim suggestiveness
      of the barren waste, the chilling wind, and the darkling sky.
      Even Baskerville fell silent and pulled his overcoat more closely
      around him.

      We had left the fertile country behind and beneath us. We looked
      back on it now, the slanting rays of a low sun turning the
      streams to threads of gold and glowing on the red earth new
      turned by the plough and the broad tangle of the woodlands. The
      road in front of us grew bleaker and wilder over huge russet and
      olive slopes, sprinkled with giant boulders. Now and then we
      passed a moorland cottage, walled and roofed with stone, with no
      creeper to break its harsh outline. Suddenly we looked down into
      a cuplike depression, patched with stunted oaks and firs which
      had been twisted and bent by the fury of years of storm. Two
      high, narrow towers rose over the trees. The driver pointed with
      his whip.

      “Baskerville Hall,” said he.

      Its master had risen and was staring with flushed cheeks and
      shining eyes. A few minutes later we had reached the lodge-gates,
      a maze of fantastic tracery in wrought iron, with weather-bitten
      pillars on either side, blotched with lichens, and surmounted by
      the boars’ heads of the Baskervilles. The lodge was a ruin of
      black granite and bared ribs of rafters, but facing it was a new
      building, half constructed, the first fruit of Sir Charles’s
      South African gold.

      Through the gateway we passed into the avenue, where the wheels
      were again hushed amid the leaves, and the old trees shot their
      branches in a sombre tunnel over our heads. Baskerville shuddered
      as he looked up the long, dark drive to where the house glimmered
      like a ghost at the farther end.

      “Was it here?” he asked in a low voice.

      “No, no, the yew alley is on the other side.”

      The young heir glanced round with a gloomy face.

      “It’s no wonder my uncle felt as if trouble were coming on him in
      such a place as this,” said he. “It’s enough to scare any man.
      I’ll have a row of electric lamps up here inside of six months,
      and you won’t know it again, with a thousand candle-power Swan
      and Edison right here in front of the hall door.”

      The avenue opened into a broad expanse of turf, and the house lay
      before us. In the fading light I could see that the centre was a
      heavy block of building from which a porch projected. The whole
      front was draped in ivy, with a patch clipped bare here and there
      where a window or a coat of arms broke through the dark veil.
      From this central block rose the twin towers, ancient,
      crenelated, and pierced with many loopholes. To right and left of
      the turrets were more modern wings of black granite. A dull light
      shone through heavy mullioned windows, and from the high chimneys
      which rose from the steep, high-angled roof there sprang a single
      black column of smoke.

      “Welcome, Sir Henry! Welcome to Baskerville Hall!”

      A tall man had stepped from the shadow of the porch to open the
      door of the wagonette. The figure of a woman was silhouetted
      against the yellow light of the hall. She came out and helped the
      man to hand down our bags.

      “You don’t mind my driving straight home, Sir Henry?” said Dr.
      Mortimer. “My wife is expecting me.”

      “Surely you will stay and have some dinner?”

      “No, I must go. I shall probably find some work awaiting me. I
      would stay to show you over the house, but Barrymore will be a
      better guide than I. Good-bye, and never hesitate night or day to
      send for me if I can be of service.”

      The wheels died away down the drive while Sir Henry and I turned
      into the hall, and the door clanged heavily behind us. It was a
      fine apartment in which we found ourselves, large, lofty, and
      heavily raftered with huge baulks of age-blackened oak. In the
      great old-fashioned fireplace behind the high iron dogs a
      log-fire crackled and snapped. Sir Henry and I held out our hands
      to it, for we were numb from our long drive. Then we gazed round
      us at the high, thin window of old stained glass, the oak
      panelling, the stags’ heads, the coats of arms upon the walls,
      all dim and sombre in the subdued light of the central lamp.

      “It’s just as I imagined it,” said Sir Henry. “Is it not the very
      picture of an old family home? To think that this should be the
      same hall in which for five hundred years my people have lived.
      It strikes me solemn to think of it.”

      I saw his dark face lit up with a boyish enthusiasm as he gazed
      about him. The light beat upon him where he stood, but long
      shadows trailed down the walls and hung like a black canopy above
      him. Barrymore had returned from taking our luggage to our rooms.
      He stood in front of us now with the subdued manner of a
      well-trained servant. He was a remarkable-looking man, tall,
      handsome, with a square black beard and pale, distinguished
      features.

      “Would you wish dinner to be served at once, sir?”

      “Is it ready?”

      “In a very few minutes, sir. You will find hot water in your
      rooms. My wife and I will be happy, Sir Henry, to stay with you
      until you have made your fresh arrangements, but you will
      understand that under the new conditions this house will require
      a considerable staff.”

      “What new conditions?”

      “I only meant, sir, that Sir Charles led a very retired life, and
      we were able to look after his wants. You would, naturally, wish
      to have more company, and so you will need changes in your
      household.”

      “Do you mean that your wife and you wish to leave?”

      “Only when it is quite convenient to you, sir.”

      “But your family have been with us for several generations, have
      they not? I should be sorry to begin my life here by breaking an
      old family connection.”

      I seemed to discern some signs of emotion upon the butler’s white
      face.

      “I feel that also, sir, and so does my wife. But to tell the
      truth, sir, we were both very much attached to Sir Charles, and
      his death gave us a shock and made these surroundings very
      painful to us. I fear that we shall never again be easy in our
      minds at Baskerville Hall.”

      “But what do you intend to do?”

      “I have no doubt, sir, that we shall succeed in establishing
      ourselves in some business. Sir Charles’s generosity has given us
      the means to do so. And now, sir, perhaps I had best show you to
      your rooms.”

      A square balustraded gallery ran round the top of the old hall,
      approached by a double stair. From this central point two long
      corridors extended the whole length of the building, from which
      all the bedrooms opened. My own was in the same wing as
      Baskerville’s and almost next door to it. These rooms appeared to
      be much more modern than the central part of the house, and the
      bright paper and numerous candles did something to remove the
      sombre impression which our arrival had left upon my mind.

      But the dining-room which opened out of the hall was a place of
      shadow and gloom. It was a long chamber with a step separating
      the daïs where the family sat from the lower portion reserved for
      their dependents. At one end a minstrel’s gallery overlooked it.
      Black beams shot across above our heads, with a smoke-darkened
      ceiling beyond them. With rows of flaring torches to light it up,
      and the colour and rude hilarity of an old-time banquet, it might
      have softened; but now, when two black-clothed gentlemen sat in
      the little circle of light thrown by a shaded lamp, one’s voice
      became hushed and one’s spirit subdued. A dim line of ancestors,
      in every variety of dress, from the Elizabethan knight to the
      buck of the Regency, stared down upon us and daunted us by their
      silent company. We talked little, and I for one was glad when the
      meal was over and we were able to retire into the modern
      billiard-room and smoke a cigarette.

      “My word, it isn’t a very cheerful place,” said Sir Henry. “I
      suppose one can tone down to it, but I feel a bit out of the
      picture at present. I don’t wonder that my uncle got a little
      jumpy if he lived all alone in such a house as this. However, if
      it suits you, we will retire early tonight, and perhaps things
      may seem more cheerful in the morning.”

      I drew aside my curtains before I went to bed and looked out from
      my window. It opened upon the grassy space which lay in front of
      the hall door. Beyond, two copses of trees moaned and swung in a
      rising wind. A half moon broke through the rifts of racing
      clouds. In its cold light I saw beyond the trees a broken fringe
      of rocks, and the long, low curve of the melancholy moor. I
      closed the curtain, feeling that my last impression was in
      keeping with the rest.

      And yet it was not quite the last. I found myself weary and yet
      wakeful, tossing restlessly from side to side, seeking for the
      sleep which would not come. Far away a chiming clock struck out
      the quarters of the hours, but otherwise a deathly silence lay
      upon the old house. And then suddenly, in the very dead of the
      night, there came a sound to my ears, clear, resonant, and
      unmistakable. It was the sob of a woman, the muffled, strangling
      gasp of one who is torn by an uncontrollable sorrow. I sat up in
      bed and listened intently. The noise could not have been far away
      and was certainly in the house. For half an hour I waited with
      every nerve on the alert, but there came no other sound save the
      chiming clock and the rustle of the ivy on the wall.




Chapter 7.
The Stapletons of Merripit House


      The fresh beauty of the following morning did something to efface
      from our minds the grim and grey impression which had been left
      upon both of us by our first experience of Baskerville Hall. As
      Sir Henry and I sat at breakfast the sunlight flooded in through
      the high mullioned windows, throwing watery patches of colour
      from the coats of arms which covered them. The dark panelling
      glowed like bronze in the golden rays, and it was hard to realise
      that this was indeed the chamber which had struck such a gloom
      into our souls upon the evening before.

      “I guess it is ourselves and not the house that we have to
      blame!” said the baronet. “We were tired with our journey and
      chilled by our drive, so we took a grey view of the place. Now we
      are fresh and well, so it is all cheerful once more.”

      “And yet it was not entirely a question of imagination,” I
      answered. “Did you, for example, happen to hear someone, a woman
      I think, sobbing in the night?”

      “That is curious, for I did when I was half asleep fancy that I
      heard something of the sort. I waited quite a time, but there was
      no more of it, so I concluded that it was all a dream.”

      “I heard it distinctly, and I am sure that it was really the sob
      of a woman.”

      “We must ask about this right away.” He rang the bell and asked
      Barrymore whether he could account for our experience. It seemed
      to me that the pallid features of the butler turned a shade paler
      still as he listened to his master’s question.

      “There are only two women in the house, Sir Henry,” he answered.
      “One is the scullery-maid, who sleeps in the other wing. The
      other is my wife, and I can answer for it that the sound could
      not have come from her.”

      And yet he lied as he said it, for it chanced that after
      breakfast I met Mrs. Barrymore in the long corridor with the sun
      full upon her face. She was a large, impassive, heavy-featured
      woman with a stern set expression of mouth. But her telltale eyes
      were red and glanced at me from between swollen lids. It was she,
      then, who wept in the night, and if she did so her husband must
      know it. Yet he had taken the obvious risk of discovery in
      declaring that it was not so. Why had he done this? And why did
      she weep so bitterly? Already round this pale-faced, handsome,
      black-bearded man there was gathering an atmosphere of mystery
      and of gloom. It was he who had been the first to discover the
      body of Sir Charles, and we had only his word for all the
      circumstances which led up to the old man’s death. Was it
      possible that it was Barrymore, after all, whom we had seen in
      the cab in Regent Street? The beard might well have been the
      same. The cabman had described a somewhat shorter man, but such
      an impression might easily have been erroneous. How could I
      settle the point forever? Obviously the first thing to do was to
      see the Grimpen postmaster and find whether the test telegram had
      really been placed in Barrymore’s own hands. Be the answer what
      it might, I should at least have something to report to Sherlock
      Holmes.

      Sir Henry had numerous papers to examine after breakfast, so that
      the time was propitious for my excursion. It was a pleasant walk
      of four miles along the edge of the moor, leading me at last to a
      small grey hamlet, in which two larger buildings, which proved to
      be the inn and the house of Dr. Mortimer, stood high above the
      rest. The postmaster, who was also the village grocer, had a
      clear recollection of the telegram.

      “Certainly, sir,” said he, “I had the telegram delivered to Mr.
      Barrymore exactly as directed.”

      “Who delivered it?”

      “My boy here. James, you delivered that telegram to Mr. Barrymore
      at the Hall last week, did you not?”

      “Yes, father, I delivered it.”

      “Into his own hands?” I asked.

      “Well, he was up in the loft at the time, so that I could not put
      it into his own hands, but I gave it into Mrs. Barrymore’s hands,
      and she promised to deliver it at once.”

      “Did you see Mr. Barrymore?”

      “No, sir; I tell you he was in the loft.”

      “If you didn’t see him, how do you know he was in the loft?”

      “Well, surely his own wife ought to know where he is,” said the
      postmaster testily. “Didn’t he get the telegram? If there is any
      mistake it is for Mr. Barrymore himself to complain.”

      It seemed hopeless to pursue the inquiry any farther, but it was
      clear that in spite of Holmes’s ruse we had no proof that
      Barrymore had not been in London all the time. Suppose that it
      were so—suppose that the same man had been the last who had seen
      Sir Charles alive, and the first to dog the new heir when he
      returned to England. What then? Was he the agent of others or had
      he some sinister design of his own? What interest could he have
      in persecuting the Baskerville family? I thought of the strange
      warning clipped out of the leading article of the _Times_. Was
      that his work or was it possibly the doing of someone who was
      bent upon counteracting his schemes? The only conceivable motive
      was that which had been suggested by Sir Henry, that if the
      family could be scared away a comfortable and permanent home
      would be secured for the Barrymores. But surely such an
      explanation as that would be quite inadequate to account for the
      deep and subtle scheming which seemed to be weaving an invisible
      net round the young baronet. Holmes himself had said that no more
      complex case had come to him in all the long series of his
      sensational investigations. I prayed, as I walked back along the
      grey, lonely road, that my friend might soon be freed from his
      preoccupations and able to come down to take this heavy burden of
      responsibility from my shoulders.

      Suddenly my thoughts were interrupted by the sound of running
      feet behind me and by a voice which called me by name. I turned,
      expecting to see Dr. Mortimer, but to my surprise it was a
      stranger who was pursuing me. He was a small, slim, clean-shaven,
      prim-faced man, flaxen-haired and lean-jawed, between thirty and
      forty years of age, dressed in a grey suit and wearing a straw
      hat. A tin box for botanical specimens hung over his shoulder and
      he carried a green butterfly-net in one of his hands.

      “You will, I am sure, excuse my presumption, Dr. Watson,” said he
      as he came panting up to where I stood. “Here on the moor we are
      homely folk and do not wait for formal introductions. You may
      possibly have heard my name from our mutual friend, Mortimer. I
      am Stapleton, of Merripit House.”

      “Your net and box would have told me as much,” said I, “for I
      knew that Mr. Stapleton was a naturalist. But how did you know
      me?”

      “I have been calling on Mortimer, and he pointed you out to me
      from the window of his surgery as you passed. As our road lay the
      same way I thought that I would overtake you and introduce
      myself. I trust that Sir Henry is none the worse for his
      journey?”

      “He is very well, thank you.”

      “We were all rather afraid that after the sad death of Sir
      Charles the new baronet might refuse to live here. It is asking
      much of a wealthy man to come down and bury himself in a place of
      this kind, but I need not tell you that it means a very great
      deal to the countryside. Sir Henry has, I suppose, no
      superstitious fears in the matter?”

      “I do not think that it is likely.”

      “Of course you know the legend of the fiend dog which haunts the
      family?”

      “I have heard it.”

      “It is extraordinary how credulous the peasants are about here!
      Any number of them are ready to swear that they have seen such a
      creature upon the moor.” He spoke with a smile, but I seemed to
      read in his eyes that he took the matter more seriously. “The
      story took a great hold upon the imagination of Sir Charles, and
      I have no doubt that it led to his tragic end.”

      “But how?”

      “His nerves were so worked up that the appearance of any dog
      might have had a fatal effect upon his diseased heart. I fancy
      that he really did see something of the kind upon that last night
      in the yew alley. I feared that some disaster might occur, for I
      was very fond of the old man, and I knew that his heart was
      weak.”

      “How did you know that?”

      “My friend Mortimer told me.”

      “You think, then, that some dog pursued Sir Charles, and that he
      died of fright in consequence?”

      “Have you any better explanation?”

      “I have not come to any conclusion.”

      “Has Mr. Sherlock Holmes?”

      The words took away my breath for an instant but a glance at the
      placid face and steadfast eyes of my companion showed that no
      surprise was intended.

      “It is useless for us to pretend that we do not know you, Dr.
      Watson,” said he. “The records of your detective have reached us
      here, and you could not celebrate him without being known
      yourself. When Mortimer told me your name he could not deny your
      identity. If you are here, then it follows that Mr. Sherlock
      Holmes is interesting himself in the matter, and I am naturally
      curious to know what view he may take.”

      “I am afraid that I cannot answer that question.”

      “May I ask if he is going to honour us with a visit himself?”

      “He cannot leave town at present. He has other cases which engage
      his attention.”

      “What a pity! He might throw some light on that which is so dark
      to us. But as to your own researches, if there is any possible
      way in which I can be of service to you I trust that you will
      command me. If I had any indication of the nature of your
      suspicions or how you propose to investigate the case, I might
      perhaps even now give you some aid or advice.”

      “I assure you that I am simply here upon a visit to my friend,
      Sir Henry, and that I need no help of any kind.”

      “Excellent!” said Stapleton. “You are perfectly right to be wary
      and discreet. I am justly reproved for what I feel was an
      unjustifiable intrusion, and I promise you that I will not
      mention the matter again.”

      We had come to a point where a narrow grassy path struck off from
      the road and wound away across the moor. A steep,
      boulder-sprinkled hill lay upon the right which had in bygone
      days been cut into a granite quarry. The face which was turned
      towards us formed a dark cliff, with ferns and brambles growing
      in its niches. From over a distant rise there floated a grey
      plume of smoke.

      “A moderate walk along this moor-path brings us to Merripit
      House,” said he. “Perhaps you will spare an hour that I may have
      the pleasure of introducing you to my sister.”

      My first thought was that I should be by Sir Henry’s side. But
      then I remembered the pile of papers and bills with which his
      study table was littered. It was certain that I could not help
      with those. And Holmes had expressly said that I should study the
      neighbours upon the moor. I accepted Stapleton’s invitation, and
      we turned together down the path.

      “It is a wonderful place, the moor,” said he, looking round over
      the undulating downs, long green rollers, with crests of jagged
      granite foaming up into fantastic surges. “You never tire of the
      moor. You cannot think the wonderful secrets which it contains.
      It is so vast, and so barren, and so mysterious.”

      “You know it well, then?”

      “I have only been here two years. The residents would call me a
      newcomer. We came shortly after Sir Charles settled. But my
      tastes led me to explore every part of the country round, and I
      should think that there are few men who know it better than I
      do.”

      “Is it hard to know?”

      “Very hard. You see, for example, this great plain to the north
      here with the queer hills breaking out of it. Do you observe
      anything remarkable about that?”

      “It would be a rare place for a gallop.”

      “You would naturally think so and the thought has cost several
      their lives before now. You notice those bright green spots
      scattered thickly over it?”

      “Yes, they seem more fertile than the rest.”

      Stapleton laughed. “That is the great Grimpen Mire,” said he. “A
      false step yonder means death to man or beast. Only yesterday I
      saw one of the moor ponies wander into it. He never came out. I
      saw his head for quite a long time craning out of the bog-hole,
      but it sucked him down at last. Even in dry seasons it is a
      danger to cross it, but after these autumn rains it is an awful
      place. And yet I can find my way to the very heart of it and
      return alive. By George, there is another of those miserable
      ponies!”

      Something brown was rolling and tossing among the green sedges.
      Then a long, agonised, writhing neck shot upward and a dreadful
      cry echoed over the moor. It turned me cold with horror, but my
      companion’s nerves seemed to be stronger than mine.

      “It’s gone!” said he. “The mire has him. Two in two days, and
      many more, perhaps, for they get in the way of going there in the
      dry weather and never know the difference until the mire has them
      in its clutches. It’s a bad place, the great Grimpen Mire.”

      “And you say you can penetrate it?”

      “Yes, there are one or two paths which a very active man can
      take. I have found them out.”

      “But why should you wish to go into so horrible a place?”

      “Well, you see the hills beyond? They are really islands cut off
      on all sides by the impassable mire, which has crawled round them
      in the course of years. That is where the rare plants and the
      butterflies are, if you have the wit to reach them.”

      “I shall try my luck some day.”

      He looked at me with a surprised face. “For God’s sake put such
      an idea out of your mind,” said he. “Your blood would be upon my
      head. I assure you that there would not be the least chance of
      your coming back alive. It is only by remembering certain complex
      landmarks that I am able to do it.”

      “Halloa!” I cried. “What is that?”

      A long, low moan, indescribably sad, swept over the moor. It
      filled the whole air, and yet it was impossible to say whence it
      came. From a dull murmur it swelled into a deep roar, and then
      sank back into a melancholy, throbbing murmur once again.
      Stapleton looked at me with a curious expression in his face.

      “Queer place, the moor!” said he.

      “But what is it?”

      “The peasants say it is the Hound of the Baskervilles calling for
      its prey. I’ve heard it once or twice before, but never quite so
      loud.”

      I looked round, with a chill of fear in my heart, at the huge
      swelling plain, mottled with the green patches of rushes. Nothing
      stirred over the vast expanse save a pair of ravens, which
      croaked loudly from a tor behind us.

      “You are an educated man. You don’t believe such nonsense as
      that?” said I. “What do you think is the cause of so strange a
      sound?”

      “Bogs make queer noises sometimes. It’s the mud settling, or the
      water rising, or something.”

      “No, no, that was a living voice.”

      “Well, perhaps it was. Did you ever hear a bittern booming?”

      “No, I never did.”

      “It’s a very rare bird—practically extinct—in England now, but
      all things are possible upon the moor. Yes, I should not be
      surprised to learn that what we have heard is the cry of the last
      of the bitterns.”

      “It’s the weirdest, strangest thing that ever I heard in my
      life.”

      “Yes, it’s rather an uncanny place altogether. Look at the
      hillside yonder. What do you make of those?”

      The whole steep slope was covered with grey circular rings of
      stone, a score of them at least.

      “What are they? Sheep-pens?”

      “No, they are the homes of our worthy ancestors. Prehistoric man
      lived thickly on the moor, and as no one in particular has lived
      there since, we find all his little arrangements exactly as he
      left them. These are his wigwams with the roofs off. You can even
      see his hearth and his couch if you have the curiosity to go
      inside.”

      “But it is quite a town. When was it inhabited?”

      “Neolithic man—no date.”

      “What did he do?”

      “He grazed his cattle on these slopes, and he learned to dig for
      tin when the bronze sword began to supersede the stone axe. Look
      at the great trench in the opposite hill. That is his mark. Yes,
      you will find some very singular points about the moor, Dr.
      Watson. Oh, excuse me an instant! It is surely Cyclopides.”

      A small fly or moth had fluttered across our path, and in an
      instant Stapleton was rushing with extraordinary energy and speed
      in pursuit of it. To my dismay the creature flew straight for the
      great mire, and my acquaintance never paused for an instant,
      bounding from tuft to tuft behind it, his green net waving in the
      air. His grey clothes and jerky, zigzag, irregular progress made
      him not unlike some huge moth himself. I was standing watching
      his pursuit with a mixture of admiration for his extraordinary
      activity and fear lest he should lose his footing in the
      treacherous mire, when I heard the sound of steps and, turning
      round, found a woman near me upon the path. She had come from the
      direction in which the plume of smoke indicated the position of
      Merripit House, but the dip of the moor had hid her until she was
      quite close.

      I could not doubt that this was the Miss Stapleton of whom I had
      been told, since ladies of any sort must be few upon the moor,
      and I remembered that I had heard someone describe her as being a
      beauty. The woman who approached me was certainly that, and of a
      most uncommon type. There could not have been a greater contrast
      between brother and sister, for Stapleton was neutral tinted,
      with light hair and grey eyes, while she was darker than any
      brunette whom I have seen in England—slim, elegant, and tall. She
      had a proud, finely cut face, so regular that it might have
      seemed impassive were it not for the sensitive mouth and the
      beautiful dark, eager eyes. With her perfect figure and elegant
      dress she was, indeed, a strange apparition upon a lonely
      moorland path. Her eyes were on her brother as I turned, and then
      she quickened her pace towards me. I had raised my hat and was
      about to make some explanatory remark when her own words turned
      all my thoughts into a new channel.

      “Go back!” she said. “Go straight back to London, instantly.”

      I could only stare at her in stupid surprise. Her eyes blazed at
      me, and she tapped the ground impatiently with her foot.

      “Why should I go back?” I asked.

      “I cannot explain.” She spoke in a low, eager voice, with a
      curious lisp in her utterance. “But for God’s sake do what I ask
      you. Go back and never set foot upon the moor again.”

      “But I have only just come.”

      “Man, man!” she cried. “Can you not tell when a warning is for
      your own good? Go back to London! Start tonight! Get away from
      this place at all costs! Hush, my brother is coming! Not a word
      of what I have said. Would you mind getting that orchid for me
      among the mare’s-tails yonder? We are very rich in orchids on the
      moor, though, of course, you are rather late to see the beauties
      of the place.”

      Stapleton had abandoned the chase and came back to us breathing
      hard and flushed with his exertions.

      “Halloa, Beryl!” said he, and it seemed to me that the tone of
      his greeting was not altogether a cordial one.

      “Well, Jack, you are very hot.”

      “Yes, I was chasing a Cyclopides. He is very rare and seldom
      found in the late autumn. What a pity that I should have missed
      him!” He spoke unconcernedly, but his small light eyes glanced
      incessantly from the girl to me.

      “You have introduced yourselves, I can see.”

      “Yes. I was telling Sir Henry that it was rather late for him to
      see the true beauties of the moor.”

      “Why, who do you think this is?”

      “I imagine that it must be Sir Henry Baskerville.”

      “No, no,” said I. “Only a humble commoner, but his friend. My
      name is Dr. Watson.”

      A flush of vexation passed over her expressive face. “We have
      been talking at cross purposes,” said she.

      “Why, you had not very much time for talk,” her brother remarked
      with the same questioning eyes.

      “I talked as if Dr. Watson were a resident instead of being
      merely a visitor,” said she. “It cannot much matter to him
      whether it is early or late for the orchids. But you will come
      on, will you not, and see Merripit House?”

      A short walk brought us to it, a bleak moorland house, once the
      farm of some grazier in the old prosperous days, but now put into
      repair and turned into a modern dwelling. An orchard surrounded
      it, but the trees, as is usual upon the moor, were stunted and
      nipped, and the effect of the whole place was mean and
      melancholy. We were admitted by a strange, wizened, rusty-coated
      old manservant, who seemed in keeping with the house. Inside,
      however, there were large rooms furnished with an elegance in
      which I seemed to recognize the taste of the lady. As I looked
      from their windows at the interminable granite-flecked moor
      rolling unbroken to the farthest horizon I could not but marvel
      at what could have brought this highly educated man and this
      beautiful woman to live in such a place.

      “Queer spot to choose, is it not?” said he as if in answer to my
      thought. “And yet we manage to make ourselves fairly happy, do we
      not, Beryl?”

      “Quite happy,” said she, but there was no ring of conviction in
      her words.

      “I had a school,” said Stapleton. “It was in the north country.
      The work to a man of my temperament was mechanical and
      uninteresting, but the privilege of living with youth, of helping
      to mould those young minds, and of impressing them with one’s own
      character and ideals was very dear to me. However, the fates were
      against us. A serious epidemic broke out in the school and three
      of the boys died. It never recovered from the blow, and much of
      my capital was irretrievably swallowed up. And yet, if it were
      not for the loss of the charming companionship of the boys, I
      could rejoice over my own misfortune, for, with my strong tastes
      for botany and zoology, I find an unlimited field of work here,
      and my sister is as devoted to Nature as I am. All this, Dr.
      Watson, has been brought upon your head by your expression as you
      surveyed the moor out of our window.”

      “It certainly did cross my mind that it might be a little
      dull—less for you, perhaps, than for your sister.”

      “No, no, I am never dull,” said she quickly.

      “We have books, we have our studies, and we have interesting
      neighbours. Dr. Mortimer is a most learned man in his own line.
      Poor Sir Charles was also an admirable companion. We knew him
      well and miss him more than I can tell. Do you think that I
      should intrude if I were to call this afternoon and make the
      acquaintance of Sir Henry?”

      “I am sure that he would be delighted.”

      “Then perhaps you would mention that I propose to do so. We may
      in our humble way do something to make things more easy for him
      until he becomes accustomed to his new surroundings. Will you
      come upstairs, Dr. Watson, and inspect my collection of
      Lepidoptera? I think it is the most complete one in the
      south-west of England. By the time that you have looked through
      them lunch will be almost ready.”

      But I was eager to get back to my charge. The melancholy of the
      moor, the death of the unfortunate pony, the weird sound which
      had been associated with the grim legend of the Baskervilles, all
      these things tinged my thoughts with sadness. Then on the top of
      these more or less vague impressions there had come the definite
      and distinct warning of Miss Stapleton, delivered with such
      intense earnestness that I could not doubt that some grave and
      deep reason lay behind it. I resisted all pressure to stay for
      lunch, and I set off at once upon my return journey, taking the
      grass-grown path by which we had come.

      It seems, however, that there must have been some short cut for
      those who knew it, for before I had reached the road I was
      astounded to see Miss Stapleton sitting upon a rock by the side
      of the track. Her face was beautifully flushed with her exertions
      and she held her hand to her side.

      “I have run all the way in order to cut you off, Dr. Watson,”
      said she. “I had not even time to put on my hat. I must not stop,
      or my brother may miss me. I wanted to say to you how sorry I am
      about the stupid mistake I made in thinking that you were Sir
      Henry. Please forget the words I said, which have no application
      whatever to you.”

      “But I can’t forget them, Miss Stapleton,” said I. “I am Sir
      Henry’s friend, and his welfare is a very close concern of mine.
      Tell me why it was that you were so eager that Sir Henry should
      return to London.”

      “A woman’s whim, Dr. Watson. When you know me better you will
      understand that I cannot always give reasons for what I say or
      do.”

      “No, no. I remember the thrill in your voice. I remember the look
      in your eyes. Please, please, be frank with me, Miss Stapleton,
      for ever since I have been here I have been conscious of shadows
      all round me. Life has become like that great Grimpen Mire, with
      little green patches everywhere into which one may sink and with
      no guide to point the track. Tell me then what it was that you
      meant, and I will promise to convey your warning to Sir Henry.”

      An expression of irresolution passed for an instant over her
      face, but her eyes had hardened again when she answered me.

      “You make too much of it, Dr. Watson,” said she. “My brother and
      I were very much shocked by the death of Sir Charles. We knew him
      very intimately, for his favourite walk was over the moor to our
      house. He was deeply impressed with the curse which hung over the
      family, and when this tragedy came I naturally felt that there
      must be some grounds for the fears which he had expressed. I was
      distressed therefore when another member of the family came down
      to live here, and I felt that he should be warned of the danger
      which he will run. That was all which I intended to convey.”

      “But what is the danger?”

      “You know the story of the hound?”

      “I do not believe in such nonsense.”

      “But I do. If you have any influence with Sir Henry, take him
      away from a place which has always been fatal to his family. The
      world is wide. Why should he wish to live at the place of
      danger?”

      “Because it _is_ the place of danger. That is Sir Henry’s nature.
      I fear that unless you can give me some more definite information
      than this it would be impossible to get him to move.”

      “I cannot say anything definite, for I do not know anything
      definite.”

      “I would ask you one more question, Miss Stapleton. If you meant
      no more than this when you first spoke to me, why should you not
      wish your brother to overhear what you said? There is nothing to
      which he, or anyone else, could object.”

      “My brother is very anxious to have the Hall inhabited, for he
      thinks it is for the good of the poor folk upon the moor. He
      would be very angry if he knew that I have said anything which
      might induce Sir Henry to go away. But I have done my duty now
      and I will say no more. I must go back, or he will miss me and
      suspect that I have seen you. Good-bye!” She turned and had
      disappeared in a few minutes among the scattered boulders, while
      I, with my soul full of vague fears, pursued my way to
      Baskerville Hall.




Chapter 8.
First Report of Dr. Watson


      From this point onward I will follow the course of events by
      transcribing my own letters to Mr. Sherlock Holmes which lie
      before me on the table. One page is missing, but otherwise they
      are exactly as written and show my feelings and suspicions of the
      moment more accurately than my memory, clear as it is upon these
      tragic events, can possibly do.

      Baskerville Hall, October 13th.

      MY DEAR HOLMES,

      My previous letters and telegrams have kept you pretty well up to
      date as to all that has occurred in this most God-forsaken corner
      of the world. The longer one stays here the more does the spirit
      of the moor sink into one’s soul, its vastness, and also its grim
      charm. When you are once out upon its bosom you have left all
      traces of modern England behind you, but, on the other hand, you
      are conscious everywhere of the homes and the work of the
      prehistoric people. On all sides of you as you walk are the
      houses of these forgotten folk, with their graves and the huge
      monoliths which are supposed to have marked their temples. As you
      look at their grey stone huts against the scarred hillsides you
      leave your own age behind you, and if you were to see a
      skin-clad, hairy man crawl out from the low door fitting a
      flint-tipped arrow on to the string of his bow, you would feel
      that his presence there was more natural than your own. The
      strange thing is that they should have lived so thickly on what
      must always have been most unfruitful soil. I am no antiquarian,
      but I could imagine that they were some unwarlike and harried
      race who were forced to accept that which none other would
      occupy.

      All this, however, is foreign to the mission on which you sent me
      and will probably be very uninteresting to your severely
      practical mind. I can still remember your complete indifference
      as to whether the sun moved round the earth or the earth round
      the sun. Let me, therefore, return to the facts concerning Sir
      Henry Baskerville.

      If you have not had any report within the last few days it is
      because up to today there was nothing of importance to relate.
      Then a very surprising circumstance occurred, which I shall tell
      you in due course. But, first of all, I must keep you in touch
      with some of the other factors in the situation.

      One of these, concerning which I have said little, is the escaped
      convict upon the moor. There is strong reason now to believe that
      he has got right away, which is a considerable relief to the
      lonely householders of this district. A fortnight has passed
      since his flight, during which he has not been seen and nothing
      has been heard of him. It is surely inconceivable that he could
      have held out upon the moor during all that time. Of course, so
      far as his concealment goes there is no difficulty at all. Any
      one of these stone huts would give him a hiding-place. But there
      is nothing to eat unless he were to catch and slaughter one of
      the moor sheep. We think, therefore, that he has gone, and the
      outlying farmers sleep the better in consequence.

      We are four able-bodied men in this household, so that we could
      take good care of ourselves, but I confess that I have had uneasy
      moments when I have thought of the Stapletons. They live miles
      from any help. There are one maid, an old manservant, the sister,
      and the brother, the latter not a very strong man. They would be
      helpless in the hands of a desperate fellow like this Notting
      Hill criminal if he could once effect an entrance. Both Sir Henry
      and I were concerned at their situation, and it was suggested
      that Perkins the groom should go over to sleep there, but
      Stapleton would not hear of it.

      The fact is that our friend, the baronet, begins to display a
      considerable interest in our fair neighbour. It is not to be
      wondered at, for time hangs heavily in this lonely spot to an
      active man like him, and she is a very fascinating and beautiful
      woman. There is something tropical and exotic about her which
      forms a singular contrast to her cool and unemotional brother.
      Yet he also gives the idea of hidden fires. He has certainly a
      very marked influence over her, for I have seen her continually
      glance at him as she talked as if seeking approbation for what
      she said. I trust that he is kind to her. There is a dry glitter
      in his eyes and a firm set of his thin lips, which goes with a
      positive and possibly a harsh nature. You would find him an
      interesting study.

      He came over to call upon Baskerville on that first day, and the
      very next morning he took us both to show us the spot where the
      legend of the wicked Hugo is supposed to have had its origin. It
      was an excursion of some miles across the moor to a place which
      is so dismal that it might have suggested the story. We found a
      short valley between rugged tors which led to an open, grassy
      space flecked over with the white cotton grass. In the middle of
      it rose two great stones, worn and sharpened at the upper end
      until they looked like the huge corroding fangs of some monstrous
      beast. In every way it corresponded with the scene of the old
      tragedy. Sir Henry was much interested and asked Stapleton more
      than once whether he did really believe in the possibility of the
      interference of the supernatural in the affairs of men. He spoke
      lightly, but it was evident that he was very much in earnest.
      Stapleton was guarded in his replies, but it was easy to see that
      he said less than he might, and that he would not express his
      whole opinion out of consideration for the feelings of the
      baronet. He told us of similar cases, where families had suffered
      from some evil influence, and he left us with the impression that
      he shared the popular view upon the matter.

      On our way back we stayed for lunch at Merripit House, and it was
      there that Sir Henry made the acquaintance of Miss Stapleton.
      From the first moment that he saw her he appeared to be strongly
      attracted by her, and I am much mistaken if the feeling was not
      mutual. He referred to her again and again on our walk home, and
      since then hardly a day has passed that we have not seen
      something of the brother and sister. They dine here tonight, and
      there is some talk of our going to them next week. One would
      imagine that such a match would be very welcome to Stapleton, and
      yet I have more than once caught a look of the strongest
      disapprobation in his face when Sir Henry has been paying some
      attention to his sister. He is much attached to her, no doubt,
      and would lead a lonely life without her, but it would seem the
      height of selfishness if he were to stand in the way of her
      making so brilliant a marriage. Yet I am certain that he does not
      wish their intimacy to ripen into love, and I have several times
      observed that he has taken pains to prevent them from being
      _tête-à-tête_. By the way, your instructions to me never to allow
      Sir Henry to go out alone will become very much more onerous if a
      love affair were to be added to our other difficulties. My
      popularity would soon suffer if I were to carry out your orders
      to the letter.

      The other day—Thursday, to be more exact—Dr. Mortimer lunched
      with us. He has been excavating a barrow at Long Down and has got
      a prehistoric skull which fills him with great joy. Never was
      there such a single-minded enthusiast as he! The Stapletons came
      in afterwards, and the good doctor took us all to the yew alley
      at Sir Henry’s request to show us exactly how everything occurred
      upon that fatal night. It is a long, dismal walk, the yew alley,
      between two high walls of clipped hedge, with a narrow band of
      grass upon either side. At the far end is an old tumble-down
      summer-house. Halfway down is the moor-gate, where the old
      gentleman left his cigar-ash. It is a white wooden gate with a
      latch. Beyond it lies the wide moor. I remembered your theory of
      the affair and tried to picture all that had occurred. As the old
      man stood there he saw something coming across the moor,
      something which terrified him so that he lost his wits and ran
      and ran until he died of sheer horror and exhaustion. There was
      the long, gloomy tunnel down which he fled. And from what? A
      sheep-dog of the moor? Or a spectral hound, black, silent, and
      monstrous? Was there a human agency in the matter? Did the pale,
      watchful Barrymore know more than he cared to say? It was all dim
      and vague, but always there is the dark shadow of crime behind
      it.

      One other neighbour I have met since I wrote last. This is Mr.
      Frankland, of Lafter Hall, who lives some four miles to the south
      of us. He is an elderly man, red-faced, white-haired, and
      choleric. His passion is for the British law, and he has spent a
      large fortune in litigation. He fights for the mere pleasure of
      fighting and is equally ready to take up either side of a
      question, so that it is no wonder that he has found it a costly
      amusement. Sometimes he will shut up a right of way and defy the
      parish to make him open it. At others he will with his own hands
      tear down some other man’s gate and declare that a path has
      existed there from time immemorial, defying the owner to
      prosecute him for trespass. He is learned in old manorial and
      communal rights, and he applies his knowledge sometimes in favour
      of the villagers of Fernworthy and sometimes against them, so
      that he is periodically either carried in triumph down the
      village street or else burned in effigy, according to his latest
      exploit. He is said to have about seven lawsuits upon his hands
      at present, which will probably swallow up the remainder of his
      fortune and so draw his sting and leave him harmless for the
      future. Apart from the law he seems a kindly, good-natured
      person, and I only mention him because you were particular that I
      should send some description of the people who surround us. He is
      curiously employed at present, for, being an amateur astronomer,
      he has an excellent telescope, with which he lies upon the roof
      of his own house and sweeps the moor all day in the hope of
      catching a glimpse of the escaped convict. If he would confine
      his energies to this all would be well, but there are rumours
      that he intends to prosecute Dr. Mortimer for opening a grave
      without the consent of the next of kin because he dug up the
      Neolithic skull in the barrow on Long Down. He helps to keep our
      lives from being monotonous and gives a little comic relief where
      it is badly needed.

      And now, having brought you up to date in the escaped convict,
      the Stapletons, Dr. Mortimer, and Frankland, of Lafter Hall, let
      me end on that which is most important and tell you more about
      the Barrymores, and especially about the surprising development
      of last night.

      First of all about the test telegram, which you sent from London
      in order to make sure that Barrymore was really here. I have
      already explained that the testimony of the postmaster shows that
      the test was worthless and that we have no proof one way or the
      other. I told Sir Henry how the matter stood, and he at once, in
      his downright fashion, had Barrymore up and asked him whether he
      had received the telegram himself. Barrymore said that he had.

      “Did the boy deliver it into your own hands?” asked Sir Henry.

      Barrymore looked surprised, and considered for a little time.

      “No,” said he, “I was in the box-room at the time, and my wife
      brought it up to me.”

      “Did you answer it yourself?”

      “No; I told my wife what to answer and she went down to write
      it.”

      In the evening he recurred to the subject of his own accord.

      “I could not quite understand the object of your questions this
      morning, Sir Henry,” said he. “I trust that they do not mean that
      I have done anything to forfeit your confidence?”

      Sir Henry had to assure him that it was not so and pacify him by
      giving him a considerable part of his old wardrobe, the London
      outfit having now all arrived.

      Mrs. Barrymore is of interest to me. She is a heavy, solid
      person, very limited, intensely respectable, and inclined to be
      puritanical. You could hardly conceive a less emotional subject.
      Yet I have told you how, on the first night here, I heard her
      sobbing bitterly, and since then I have more than once observed
      traces of tears upon her face. Some deep sorrow gnaws ever at her
      heart. Sometimes I wonder if she has a guilty memory which haunts
      her, and sometimes I suspect Barrymore of being a domestic
      tyrant. I have always felt that there was something singular and
      questionable in this man’s character, but the adventure of last
      night brings all my suspicions to a head.

      And yet it may seem a small matter in itself. You are aware that
      I am not a very sound sleeper, and since I have been on guard in
      this house my slumbers have been lighter than ever. Last night,
      about two in the morning, I was aroused by a stealthy step
      passing my room. I rose, opened my door, and peeped out. A long
      black shadow was trailing down the corridor. It was thrown by a
      man who walked softly down the passage with a candle held in his
      hand. He was in shirt and trousers, with no covering to his feet.
      I could merely see the outline, but his height told me that it
      was Barrymore. He walked very slowly and circumspectly, and there
      was something indescribably guilty and furtive in his whole
      appearance.

      I have told you that the corridor is broken by the balcony which
      runs round the hall, but that it is resumed upon the farther
      side. I waited until he had passed out of sight and then I
      followed him. When I came round the balcony he had reached the
      end of the farther corridor, and I could see from the glimmer of
      light through an open door that he had entered one of the rooms.
      Now, all these rooms are unfurnished and unoccupied so that his
      expedition became more mysterious than ever. The light shone
      steadily as if he were standing motionless. I crept down the
      passage as noiselessly as I could and peeped round the corner of
      the door.

      Barrymore was crouching at the window with the candle held
      against the glass. His profile was half turned towards me, and
      his face seemed to be rigid with expectation as he stared out
      into the blackness of the moor. For some minutes he stood
      watching intently. Then he gave a deep groan and with an
      impatient gesture he put out the light. Instantly I made my way
      back to my room, and very shortly came the stealthy steps passing
      once more upon their return journey. Long afterwards when I had
      fallen into a light sleep I heard a key turn somewhere in a lock,
      but I could not tell whence the sound came. What it all means I
      cannot guess, but there is some secret business going on in this
      house of gloom which sooner or later we shall get to the bottom
      of. I do not trouble you with my theories, for you asked me to
      furnish you only with facts. I have had a long talk with Sir
      Henry this morning, and we have made a plan of campaign founded
      upon my observations of last night. I will not speak about it
      just now, but it should make my next report interesting reading.




Chapter 9.
The Light upon the Moor [Second Report of Dr. Watson]


      Baskerville Hall, Oct. 15th.

      MY DEAR HOLMES,

      If I was compelled to leave you without much news during the
      early days of my mission you must acknowledge that I am making up
      for lost time, and that events are now crowding thick and fast
      upon us. In my last report I ended upon my top note with
      Barrymore at the window, and now I have quite a budget already
      which will, unless I am much mistaken, considerably surprise you.
      Things have taken a turn which I could not have anticipated. In
      some ways they have within the last forty-eight hours become much
      clearer and in some ways they have become more complicated. But I
      will tell you all and you shall judge for yourself.

      Before breakfast on the morning following my adventure I went
      down the corridor and examined the room in which Barrymore had
      been on the night before. The western window through which he had
      stared so intently has, I noticed, one peculiarity above all
      other windows in the house—it commands the nearest outlook on to
      the moor. There is an opening between two trees which enables one
      from this point of view to look right down upon it, while from
      all the other windows it is only a distant glimpse which can be
      obtained. It follows, therefore, that Barrymore, since only this
      window would serve the purpose, must have been looking out for
      something or somebody upon the moor. The night was very dark, so
      that I can hardly imagine how he could have hoped to see anyone.
      It had struck me that it was possible that some love intrigue was
      on foot. That would have accounted for his stealthy movements and
      also for the uneasiness of his wife. The man is a
      striking-looking fellow, very well equipped to steal the heart of
      a country girl, so that this theory seemed to have something to
      support it. That opening of the door which I had heard after I
      had returned to my room might mean that he had gone out to keep
      some clandestine appointment. So I reasoned with myself in the
      morning, and I tell you the direction of my suspicions, however
      much the result may have shown that they were unfounded.

      But whatever the true explanation of Barrymore’s movements might
      be, I felt that the responsibility of keeping them to myself
      until I could explain them was more than I could bear. I had an
      interview with the baronet in his study after breakfast, and I
      told him all that I had seen. He was less surprised than I had
      expected.

      “I knew that Barrymore walked about nights, and I had a mind to
      speak to him about it,” said he. “Two or three times I have heard
      his steps in the passage, coming and going, just about the hour
      you name.”

      “Perhaps then he pays a visit every night to that particular
      window,” I suggested.

      “Perhaps he does. If so, we should be able to shadow him and see
      what it is that he is after. I wonder what your friend Holmes
      would do if he were here.”

      “I believe that he would do exactly what you now suggest,” said
      I. “He would follow Barrymore and see what he did.”

      “Then we shall do it together.”

      “But surely he would hear us.”

      “The man is rather deaf, and in any case we must take our chance
      of that. We’ll sit up in my room tonight and wait until he
      passes.” Sir Henry rubbed his hands with pleasure, and it was
      evident that he hailed the adventure as a relief to his somewhat
      quiet life upon the moor.

      The baronet has been in communication with the architect who
      prepared the plans for Sir Charles, and with a contractor from
      London, so that we may expect great changes to begin here soon.
      There have been decorators and furnishers up from Plymouth, and
      it is evident that our friend has large ideas and means to spare
      no pains or expense to restore the grandeur of his family. When
      the house is renovated and refurnished, all that he will need
      will be a wife to make it complete. Between ourselves there are
      pretty clear signs that this will not be wanting if the lady is
      willing, for I have seldom seen a man more infatuated with a
      woman than he is with our beautiful neighbour, Miss Stapleton.
      And yet the course of true love does not run quite as smoothly as
      one would under the circumstances expect. Today, for example, its
      surface was broken by a very unexpected ripple, which has caused
      our friend considerable perplexity and annoyance.

      After the conversation which I have quoted about Barrymore, Sir
      Henry put on his hat and prepared to go out. As a matter of
      course I did the same.

      “What, are _you_ coming, Watson?” he asked, looking at me in a
      curious way.

      “That depends on whether you are going on the moor,” said I.

      “Yes, I am.”

      “Well, you know what my instructions are. I am sorry to intrude,
      but you heard how earnestly Holmes insisted that I should not
      leave you, and especially that you should not go alone upon the
      moor.”

      Sir Henry put his hand upon my shoulder with a pleasant smile.

      “My dear fellow,” said he, “Holmes, with all his wisdom, did not
      foresee some things which have happened since I have been on the
      moor. You understand me? I am sure that you are the last man in
      the world who would wish to be a spoil-sport. I must go out
      alone.”

      It put me in a most awkward position. I was at a loss what to say
      or what to do, and before I had made up my mind he picked up his
      cane and was gone.

      But when I came to think the matter over my conscience reproached
      me bitterly for having on any pretext allowed him to go out of my
      sight. I imagined what my feelings would be if I had to return to
      you and to confess that some misfortune had occurred through my
      disregard for your instructions. I assure you my cheeks flushed
      at the very thought. It might not even now be too late to
      overtake him, so I set off at once in the direction of Merripit
      House.

      I hurried along the road at the top of my speed without seeing
      anything of Sir Henry, until I came to the point where the moor
      path branches off. There, fearing that perhaps I had come in the
      wrong direction after all, I mounted a hill from which I could
      command a view—the same hill which is cut into the dark quarry.
      Thence I saw him at once. He was on the moor path about a quarter
      of a mile off, and a lady was by his side who could only be Miss
      Stapleton. It was clear that there was already an understanding
      between them and that they had met by appointment. They were
      walking slowly along in deep conversation, and I saw her making
      quick little movements of her hands as if she were very earnest
      in what she was saying, while he listened intently, and once or
      twice shook his head in strong dissent. I stood among the rocks
      watching them, very much puzzled as to what I should do next. To
      follow them and break into their intimate conversation seemed to
      be an outrage, and yet my clear duty was never for an instant to
      let him out of my sight. To act the spy upon a friend was a
      hateful task. Still, I could see no better course than to observe
      him from the hill, and to clear my conscience by confessing to
      him afterwards what I had done. It is true that if any sudden
      danger had threatened him I was too far away to be of use, and
      yet I am sure that you will agree with me that the position was
      very difficult, and that there was nothing more which I could do.

      Our friend, Sir Henry, and the lady had halted on the path and
      were standing deeply absorbed in their conversation, when I was
      suddenly aware that I was not the only witness of their
      interview. A wisp of green floating in the air caught my eye, and
      another glance showed me that it was carried on a stick by a man
      who was moving among the broken ground. It was Stapleton with his
      butterfly-net. He was very much closer to the pair than I was,
      and he appeared to be moving in their direction. At this instant
      Sir Henry suddenly drew Miss Stapleton to his side. His arm was
      round her, but it seemed to me that she was straining away from
      him with her face averted. He stooped his head to hers, and she
      raised one hand as if in protest. Next moment I saw them spring
      apart and turn hurriedly round. Stapleton was the cause of the
      interruption. He was running wildly towards them, his absurd net
      dangling behind him. He gesticulated and almost danced with
      excitement in front of the lovers. What the scene meant I could
      not imagine, but it seemed to me that Stapleton was abusing Sir
      Henry, who offered explanations, which became more angry as the
      other refused to accept them. The lady stood by in haughty
      silence. Finally Stapleton turned upon his heel and beckoned in a
      peremptory way to his sister, who, after an irresolute glance at
      Sir Henry, walked off by the side of her brother. The
      naturalist’s angry gestures showed that the lady was included in
      his displeasure. The baronet stood for a minute looking after
      them, and then he walked slowly back the way that he had come,
      his head hanging, the very picture of dejection.

      What all this meant I could not imagine, but I was deeply ashamed
      to have witnessed so intimate a scene without my friend’s
      knowledge. I ran down the hill therefore and met the baronet at
      the bottom. His face was flushed with anger and his brows were
      wrinkled, like one who is at his wit’s ends what to do.

      “Halloa, Watson! Where have you dropped from?” said he. “You
      don’t mean to say that you came after me in spite of all?”

      I explained everything to him: how I had found it impossible to
      remain behind, how I had followed him, and how I had witnessed
      all that had occurred. For an instant his eyes blazed at me, but
      my frankness disarmed his anger, and he broke at last into a
      rather rueful laugh.

      “You would have thought the middle of that prairie a fairly safe
      place for a man to be private,” said he, “but, by thunder, the
      whole countryside seems to have been out to see me do my
      wooing—and a mighty poor wooing at that! Where had you engaged a
      seat?”

      “I was on that hill.”

      “Quite in the back row, eh? But her brother was well up to the
      front. Did you see him come out on us?”

      “Yes, I did.”

      “Did he ever strike you as being crazy—this brother of hers?”

      “I can’t say that he ever did.”

      “I dare say not. I always thought him sane enough until today,
      but you can take it from me that either he or I ought to be in a
      straitjacket. What’s the matter with me, anyhow? You’ve lived
      near me for some weeks, Watson. Tell me straight, now! Is there
      anything that would prevent me from making a good husband to a
      woman that I loved?”

      “I should say not.”

      “He can’t object to my worldly position, so it must be myself
      that he has this down on. What has he against me? I never hurt
      man or woman in my life that I know of. And yet he would not so
      much as let me touch the tips of her fingers.”

      “Did he say so?”

      “That, and a deal more. I tell you, Watson, I’ve only known her
      these few weeks, but from the first I just felt that she was made
      for me, and she, too—she was happy when she was with me, and that
      I’ll swear. There’s a light in a woman’s eyes that speaks louder
      than words. But he has never let us get together and it was only
      today for the first time that I saw a chance of having a few
      words with her alone. She was glad to meet me, but when she did
      it was not love that she would talk about, and she wouldn’t have
      let me talk about it either if she could have stopped it. She
      kept coming back to it that this was a place of danger, and that
      she would never be happy until I had left it. I told her that
      since I had seen her I was in no hurry to leave it, and that if
      she really wanted me to go, the only way to work it was for her
      to arrange to go with me. With that I offered in as many words to
      marry her, but before she could answer, down came this brother of
      hers, running at us with a face on him like a madman. He was just
      white with rage, and those light eyes of his were blazing with
      fury. What was I doing with the lady? How dared I offer her
      attentions which were distasteful to her? Did I think that
      because I was a baronet I could do what I liked? If he had not
      been her brother I should have known better how to answer him. As
      it was I told him that my feelings towards his sister were such
      as I was not ashamed of, and that I hoped that she might honour
      me by becoming my wife. That seemed to make the matter no better,
      so then I lost my temper too, and I answered him rather more
      hotly than I should perhaps, considering that she was standing
      by. So it ended by his going off with her, as you saw, and here
      am I as badly puzzled a man as any in this county. Just tell me
      what it all means, Watson, and I’ll owe you more than ever I can
      hope to pay.”

      I tried one or two explanations, but, indeed, I was completely
      puzzled myself. Our friend’s title, his fortune, his age, his
      character, and his appearance are all in his favour, and I know
      nothing against him unless it be this dark fate which runs in his
      family. That his advances should be rejected so brusquely without
      any reference to the lady’s own wishes and that the lady should
      accept the situation without protest is very amazing. However,
      our conjectures were set at rest by a visit from Stapleton
      himself that very afternoon. He had come to offer apologies for
      his rudeness of the morning, and after a long private interview
      with Sir Henry in his study the upshot of their conversation was
      that the breach is quite healed, and that we are to dine at
      Merripit House next Friday as a sign of it.

      “I don’t say now that he isn’t a crazy man,” said Sir Henry; “I
      can’t forget the look in his eyes when he ran at me this morning,
      but I must allow that no man could make a more handsome apology
      than he has done.”

      “Did he give any explanation of his conduct?”

      “His sister is everything in his life, he says. That is natural
      enough, and I am glad that he should understand her value. They
      have always been together, and according to his account he has
      been a very lonely man with only her as a companion, so that the
      thought of losing her was really terrible to him. He had not
      understood, he said, that I was becoming attached to her, but
      when he saw with his own eyes that it was really so, and that she
      might be taken away from him, it gave him such a shock that for a
      time he was not responsible for what he said or did. He was very
      sorry for all that had passed, and he recognized how foolish and
      how selfish it was that he should imagine that he could hold a
      beautiful woman like his sister to himself for her whole life. If
      she had to leave him he had rather it was to a neighbour like
      myself than to anyone else. But in any case it was a blow to him
      and it would take him some time before he could prepare himself
      to meet it. He would withdraw all opposition upon his part if I
      would promise for three months to let the matter rest and to be
      content with cultivating the lady’s friendship during that time
      without claiming her love. This I promised, and so the matter
      rests.”

      So there is one of our small mysteries cleared up. It is
      something to have touched bottom anywhere in this bog in which we
      are floundering. We know now why Stapleton looked with disfavour
      upon his sister’s suitor—even when that suitor was so eligible a
      one as Sir Henry. And now I pass on to another thread which I
      have extricated out of the tangled skein, the mystery of the sobs
      in the night, of the tear-stained face of Mrs. Barrymore, of the
      secret journey of the butler to the western lattice window.
      Congratulate me, my dear Holmes, and tell me that I have not
      disappointed you as an agent—that you do not regret the
      confidence which you showed in me when you sent me down. All
      these things have by one night’s work been thoroughly cleared.

      I have said “by one night’s work,” but, in truth, it was by two
      nights’ work, for on the first we drew entirely blank. I sat up
      with Sir Henry in his rooms until nearly three o’clock in the
      morning, but no sound of any sort did we hear except the chiming
      clock upon the stairs. It was a most melancholy vigil and ended
      by each of us falling asleep in our chairs. Fortunately we were
      not discouraged, and we determined to try again. The next night
      we lowered the lamp and sat smoking cigarettes without making the
      least sound. It was incredible how slowly the hours crawled by,
      and yet we were helped through it by the same sort of patient
      interest which the hunter must feel as he watches the trap into
      which he hopes the game may wander. One struck, and two, and we
      had almost for the second time given it up in despair when in an
      instant we both sat bolt upright in our chairs with all our weary
      senses keenly on the alert once more. We had heard the creak of a
      step in the passage.

      Very stealthily we heard it pass along until it died away in the
      distance. Then the baronet gently opened his door and we set out
      in pursuit. Already our man had gone round the gallery and the
      corridor was all in darkness. Softly we stole along until we had
      come into the other wing. We were just in time to catch a glimpse
      of the tall, black-bearded figure, his shoulders rounded as he
      tiptoed down the passage. Then he passed through the same door as
      before, and the light of the candle framed it in the darkness and
      shot one single yellow beam across the gloom of the corridor. We
      shuffled cautiously towards it, trying every plank before we
      dared to put our whole weight upon it. We had taken the
      precaution of leaving our boots behind us, but, even so, the old
      boards snapped and creaked beneath our tread. Sometimes it seemed
      impossible that he should fail to hear our approach. However, the
      man is fortunately rather deaf, and he was entirely preoccupied
      in that which he was doing. When at last we reached the door and
      peeped through we found him crouching at the window, candle in
      hand, his white, intent face pressed against the pane, exactly as
      I had seen him two nights before.

      We had arranged no plan of campaign, but the baronet is a man to
      whom the most direct way is always the most natural. He walked
      into the room, and as he did so Barrymore sprang up from the
      window with a sharp hiss of his breath and stood, livid and
      trembling, before us. His dark eyes, glaring out of the white
      mask of his face, were full of horror and astonishment as he
      gazed from Sir Henry to me.

      “What are you doing here, Barrymore?”

      “Nothing, sir.” His agitation was so great that he could hardly
      speak, and the shadows sprang up and down from the shaking of his
      candle. “It was the window, sir. I go round at night to see that
      they are fastened.”

      “On the second floor?”

      “Yes, sir, all the windows.”

      “Look here, Barrymore,” said Sir Henry sternly, “we have made up
      our minds to have the truth out of you, so it will save you
      trouble to tell it sooner rather than later. Come, now! No lies!
      What were you doing at that window?”

      The fellow looked at us in a helpless way, and he wrung his hands
      together like one who is in the last extremity of doubt and
      misery.

      “I was doing no harm, sir. I was holding a candle to the window.”

      “And why were you holding a candle to the window?”

      “Don’t ask me, Sir Henry—don’t ask me! I give you my word, sir,
      that it is not my secret, and that I cannot tell it. If it
      concerned no one but myself I would not try to keep it from you.”

      A sudden idea occurred to me, and I took the candle from the
      trembling hand of the butler.

      “He must have been holding it as a signal,” said I. “Let us see
      if there is any answer.” I held it as he had done, and stared out
      into the darkness of the night. Vaguely I could discern the black
      bank of the trees and the lighter expanse of the moor, for the
      moon was behind the clouds. And then I gave a cry of exultation,
      for a tiny pinpoint of yellow light had suddenly transfixed the
      dark veil, and glowed steadily in the centre of the black square
      framed by the window.

      “There it is!” I cried.

      “No, no, sir, it is nothing—nothing at all!” the butler broke in;
      “I assure you, sir—”

      “Move your light across the window, Watson!” cried the baronet.
      “See, the other moves also! Now, you rascal, do you deny that it
      is a signal? Come, speak up! Who is your confederate out yonder,
      and what is this conspiracy that is going on?”

      The man’s face became openly defiant. “It is my business, and not
      yours. I will not tell.”

      “Then you leave my employment right away.”

      “Very good, sir. If I must I must.”

      “And you go in disgrace. By thunder, you may well be ashamed of
      yourself. Your family has lived with mine for over a hundred
      years under this roof, and here I find you deep in some dark plot
      against me.”

      “No, no, sir; no, not against you!” It was a woman’s voice, and
      Mrs. Barrymore, paler and more horror-struck than her husband,
      was standing at the door. Her bulky figure in a shawl and skirt
      might have been comic were it not for the intensity of feeling
      upon her face.

      “We have to go, Eliza. This is the end of it. You can pack our
      things,” said the butler.

      “Oh, John, John, have I brought you to this? It is my doing, Sir
      Henry—all mine. He has done nothing except for my sake and
      because I asked him.”

      “Speak out, then! What does it mean?”

      “My unhappy brother is starving on the moor. We cannot let him
      perish at our very gates. The light is a signal to him that food
      is ready for him, and his light out yonder is to show the spot to
      which to bring it.”

      “Then your brother is—”

      “The escaped convict, sir—Selden, the criminal.”

      “That’s the truth, sir,” said Barrymore. “I said that it was not
      my secret and that I could not tell it to you. But now you have
      heard it, and you will see that if there was a plot it was not
      against you.”

      This, then, was the explanation of the stealthy expeditions at
      night and the light at the window. Sir Henry and I both stared at
      the woman in amazement. Was it possible that this stolidly
      respectable person was of the same blood as one of the most
      notorious criminals in the country?

      “Yes, sir, my name was Selden, and he is my younger brother. We
      humoured him too much when he was a lad and gave him his own way
      in everything until he came to think that the world was made for
      his pleasure, and that he could do what he liked in it. Then as
      he grew older he met wicked companions, and the devil entered
      into him until he broke my mother’s heart and dragged our name in
      the dirt. From crime to crime he sank lower and lower until it is
      only the mercy of God which has snatched him from the scaffold;
      but to me, sir, he was always the little curly-headed boy that I
      had nursed and played with as an elder sister would. That was why
      he broke prison, sir. He knew that I was here and that we could
      not refuse to help him. When he dragged himself here one night,
      weary and starving, with the warders hard at his heels, what
      could we do? We took him in and fed him and cared for him. Then
      you returned, sir, and my brother thought he would be safer on
      the moor than anywhere else until the hue and cry was over, so he
      lay in hiding there. But every second night we made sure if he
      was still there by putting a light in the window, and if there
      was an answer my husband took out some bread and meat to him.
      Every day we hoped that he was gone, but as long as he was there
      we could not desert him. That is the whole truth, as I am an
      honest Christian woman and you will see that if there is blame in
      the matter it does not lie with my husband but with me, for whose
      sake he has done all that he has.”

      The woman’s words came with an intense earnestness which carried
      conviction with them.

      “Is this true, Barrymore?”

      “Yes, Sir Henry. Every word of it.”

      “Well, I cannot blame you for standing by your own wife. Forget
      what I have said. Go to your room, you two, and we shall talk
      further about this matter in the morning.”

      When they were gone we looked out of the window again. Sir Henry
      had flung it open, and the cold night wind beat in upon our
      faces. Far away in the black distance there still glowed that one
      tiny point of yellow light.

      “I wonder he dares,” said Sir Henry.

      “It may be so placed as to be only visible from here.”

      “Very likely. How far do you think it is?”

      “Out by the Cleft Tor, I think.”

      “Not more than a mile or two off.”

      “Hardly that.”

      “Well, it cannot be far if Barrymore had to carry out the food to
      it. And he is waiting, this villain, beside that candle. By
      thunder, Watson, I am going out to take that man!”

      The same thought had crossed my own mind. It was not as if the
      Barrymores had taken us into their confidence. Their secret had
      been forced from them. The man was a danger to the community, an
      unmitigated scoundrel for whom there was neither pity nor excuse.
      We were only doing our duty in taking this chance of putting him
      back where he could do no harm. With his brutal and violent
      nature, others would have to pay the price if we held our hands.
      Any night, for example, our neighbours the Stapletons might be
      attacked by him, and it may have been the thought of this which
      made Sir Henry so keen upon the adventure.

      “I will come,” said I.

      “Then get your revolver and put on your boots. The sooner we
      start the better, as the fellow may put out his light and be
      off.”

      In five minutes we were outside the door, starting upon our
      expedition. We hurried through the dark shrubbery, amid the dull
      moaning of the autumn wind and the rustle of the falling leaves.
      The night air was heavy with the smell of damp and decay. Now and
      again the moon peeped out for an instant, but clouds were driving
      over the face of the sky, and just as we came out on the moor a
      thin rain began to fall. The light still burned steadily in
      front.

      “Are you armed?” I asked.

      “I have a hunting-crop.”

      “We must close in on him rapidly, for he is said to be a
      desperate fellow. We shall take him by surprise and have him at
      our mercy before he can resist.”

      “I say, Watson,” said the baronet, “what would Holmes say to
      this? How about that hour of darkness in which the power of evil
      is exalted?”

      As if in answer to his words there rose suddenly out of the vast
      gloom of the moor that strange cry which I had already heard upon
      the borders of the great Grimpen Mire. It came with the wind
      through the silence of the night, a long, deep mutter, then a
      rising howl, and then the sad moan in which it died away. Again
      and again it sounded, the whole air throbbing with it, strident,
      wild, and menacing. The baronet caught my sleeve and his face
      glimmered white through the darkness.

      “My God, what’s that, Watson?”

      “I don’t know. It’s a sound they have on the moor. I heard it
      once before.”

      It died away, and an absolute silence closed in upon us. We stood
      straining our ears, but nothing came.

      “Watson,” said the baronet, “it was the cry of a hound.”

      My blood ran cold in my veins, for there was a break in his voice
      which told of the sudden horror which had seized him.

      “What do they call this sound?” he asked.

      “Who?”

      “The folk on the countryside.”

      “Oh, they are ignorant people. Why should you mind what they call
      it?”

      “Tell me, Watson. What do they say of it?”

      I hesitated but could not escape the question.

      “They say it is the cry of the Hound of the Baskervilles.”

      He groaned and was silent for a few moments.

      “A hound it was,” he said at last, “but it seemed to come from
      miles away, over yonder, I think.”

      “It was hard to say whence it came.”

      “It rose and fell with the wind. Isn’t that the direction of the
      great Grimpen Mire?”

      “Yes, it is.”

      “Well, it was up there. Come now, Watson, didn’t you think
      yourself that it was the cry of a hound? I am not a child. You
      need not fear to speak the truth.”

      “Stapleton was with me when I heard it last. He said that it
      might be the calling of a strange bird.”

      “No, no, it was a hound. My God, can there be some truth in all
      these stories? Is it possible that I am really in danger from so
      dark a cause? You don’t believe it, do you, Watson?”

      “No, no.”

      “And yet it was one thing to laugh about it in London, and it is
      another to stand out here in the darkness of the moor and to hear
      such a cry as that. And my uncle! There was the footprint of the
      hound beside him as he lay. It all fits together. I don’t think
      that I am a coward, Watson, but that sound seemed to freeze my
      very blood. Feel my hand!”

      It was as cold as a block of marble.

      “You’ll be all right tomorrow.”

      “I don’t think I’ll get that cry out of my head. What do you
      advise that we do now?”

      “Shall we turn back?”

      “No, by thunder; we have come out to get our man, and we will do
      it. We after the convict, and a hell-hound, as likely as not,
      after us. Come on! We’ll see it through if all the fiends of the
      pit were loose upon the moor.”

      We stumbled slowly along in the darkness, with the black loom of
      the craggy hills around us, and the yellow speck of light burning
      steadily in front. There is nothing so deceptive as the distance
      of a light upon a pitch-dark night, and sometimes the glimmer
      seemed to be far away upon the horizon and sometimes it might
      have been within a few yards of us. But at last we could see
      whence it came, and then we knew that we were indeed very close.
      A guttering candle was stuck in a crevice of the rocks which
      flanked it on each side so as to keep the wind from it and also
      to prevent it from being visible, save in the direction of
      Baskerville Hall. A boulder of granite concealed our approach,
      and crouching behind it we gazed over it at the signal light. It
      was strange to see this single candle burning there in the middle
      of the moor, with no sign of life near it—just the one straight
      yellow flame and the gleam of the rock on each side of it.

      “What shall we do now?” whispered Sir Henry.

      “Wait here. He must be near his light. Let us see if we can get a
      glimpse of him.”

      The words were hardly out of my mouth when we both saw him. Over
      the rocks, in the crevice of which the candle burned, there was
      thrust out an evil yellow face, a terrible animal face, all
      seamed and scored with vile passions. Foul with mire, with a
      bristling beard, and hung with matted hair, it might well have
      belonged to one of those old savages who dwelt in the burrows on
      the hillsides. The light beneath him was reflected in his small,
      cunning eyes which peered fiercely to right and left through the
      darkness like a crafty and savage animal who has heard the steps
      of the hunters.

      Something had evidently aroused his suspicions. It may have been
      that Barrymore had some private signal which we had neglected to
      give, or the fellow may have had some other reason for thinking
      that all was not well, but I could read his fears upon his wicked
      face. Any instant he might dash out the light and vanish in the
      darkness. I sprang forward therefore, and Sir Henry did the same.
      At the same moment the convict screamed out a curse at us and
      hurled a rock which splintered up against the boulder which had
      sheltered us. I caught one glimpse of his short, squat, strongly
      built figure as he sprang to his feet and turned to run. At the
      same moment by a lucky chance the moon broke through the clouds.
      We rushed over the brow of the hill, and there was our man
      running with great speed down the other side, springing over the
      stones in his way with the activity of a mountain goat. A lucky
      long shot of my revolver might have crippled him, but I had
      brought it only to defend myself if attacked and not to shoot an
      unarmed man who was running away.

      We were both swift runners and in fairly good training, but we
      soon found that we had no chance of overtaking him. We saw him
      for a long time in the moonlight until he was only a small speck
      moving swiftly among the boulders upon the side of a distant
      hill. We ran and ran until we were completely blown, but the
      space between us grew ever wider. Finally we stopped and sat
      panting on two rocks, while we watched him disappearing in the
      distance.

      And it was at this moment that there occurred a most strange and
      unexpected thing. We had risen from our rocks and were turning to
      go home, having abandoned the hopeless chase. The moon was low
      upon the right, and the jagged pinnacle of a granite tor stood up
      against the lower curve of its silver disc. There, outlined as
      black as an ebony statue on that shining background, I saw the
      figure of a man upon the tor. Do not think that it was a
      delusion, Holmes. I assure you that I have never in my life seen
      anything more clearly. As far as I could judge, the figure was
      that of a tall, thin man. He stood with his legs a little
      separated, his arms folded, his head bowed, as if he were
      brooding over that enormous wilderness of peat and granite which
      lay before him. He might have been the very spirit of that
      terrible place. It was not the convict. This man was far from the
      place where the latter had disappeared. Besides, he was a much
      taller man. With a cry of surprise I pointed him out to the
      baronet, but in the instant during which I had turned to grasp
      his arm the man was gone. There was the sharp pinnacle of granite
      still cutting the lower edge of the moon, but its peak bore no
      trace of that silent and motionless figure.

      I wished to go in that direction and to search the tor, but it
      was some distance away. The baronet’s nerves were still quivering
      from that cry, which recalled the dark story of his family, and
      he was not in the mood for fresh adventures. He had not seen this
      lonely man upon the tor and could not feel the thrill which his
      strange presence and his commanding attitude had given to me. “A
      warder, no doubt,” said he. “The moor has been thick with them
      since this fellow escaped.” Well, perhaps his explanation may be
      the right one, but I should like to have some further proof of
      it. Today we mean to communicate to the Princetown people where
      they should look for their missing man, but it is hard lines that
      we have not actually had the triumph of bringing him back as our
      own prisoner. Such are the adventures of last night, and you must
      acknowledge, my dear Holmes, that I have done you very well in
      the matter of a report. Much of what I tell you is no doubt quite
      irrelevant, but still I feel that it is best that I should let
      you have all the facts and leave you to select for yourself those
      which will be of most service to you in helping you to your
      conclusions. We are certainly making some progress. So far as the
      Barrymores go we have found the motive of their actions, and that
      has cleared up the situation very much. But the moor with its
      mysteries and its strange inhabitants remains as inscrutable as
      ever. Perhaps in my next I may be able to throw some light upon
      this also. Best of all would it be if you could come down to us.
      In any case you will hear from me again in the course of the next
      few days.




Chapter 10.
Extract from the Diary of Dr. Watson


      So far I have been able to quote from the reports which I have
      forwarded during these early days to Sherlock Holmes. Now,
      however, I have arrived at a point in my narrative where I am
      compelled to abandon this method and to trust once more to my
      recollections, aided by the diary which I kept at the time. A few
      extracts from the latter will carry me on to those scenes which
      are indelibly fixed in every detail upon my memory. I proceed,
      then, from the morning which followed our abortive chase of the
      convict and our other strange experiences upon the moor.

      _October_ 16_th_.—A dull and foggy day with a drizzle of rain.
      The house is banked in with rolling clouds, which rise now and
      then to show the dreary curves of the moor, with thin, silver
      veins upon the sides of the hills, and the distant boulders
      gleaming where the light strikes upon their wet faces. It is
      melancholy outside and in. The baronet is in a black reaction
      after the excitements of the night. I am conscious myself of a
      weight at my heart and a feeling of impending danger—ever present
      danger, which is the more terrible because I am unable to define
      it.

      And have I not cause for such a feeling? Consider the long
      sequence of incidents which have all pointed to some sinister
      influence which is at work around us. There is the death of the
      last occupant of the Hall, fulfilling so exactly the conditions
      of the family legend, and there are the repeated reports from
      peasants of the appearance of a strange creature upon the moor.
      Twice I have with my own ears heard the sound which resembled the
      distant baying of a hound. It is incredible, impossible, that it
      should really be outside the ordinary laws of nature. A spectral
      hound which leaves material footmarks and fills the air with its
      howling is surely not to be thought of. Stapleton may fall in
      with such a superstition, and Mortimer also, but if I have one
      quality upon earth it is common sense, and nothing will persuade
      me to believe in such a thing. To do so would be to descend to
      the level of these poor peasants, who are not content with a mere
      fiend dog but must needs describe him with hell-fire shooting
      from his mouth and eyes. Holmes would not listen to such fancies,
      and I am his agent. But facts are facts, and I have twice heard
      this crying upon the moor. Suppose that there were really some
      huge hound loose upon it; that would go far to explain
      everything. But where could such a hound lie concealed, where did
      it get its food, where did it come from, how was it that no one
      saw it by day? It must be confessed that the natural explanation
      offers almost as many difficulties as the other. And always,
      apart from the hound, there is the fact of the human agency in
      London, the man in the cab, and the letter which warned Sir Henry
      against the moor. This at least was real, but it might have been
      the work of a protecting friend as easily as of an enemy. Where
      is that friend or enemy now? Has he remained in London, or has he
      followed us down here? Could he—could he be the stranger whom I
      saw upon the tor?

      It is true that I have had only the one glance at him, and yet
      there are some things to which I am ready to swear. He is no one
      whom I have seen down here, and I have now met all the
      neighbours. The figure was far taller than that of Stapleton, far
      thinner than that of Frankland. Barrymore it might possibly have
      been, but we had left him behind us, and I am certain that he
      could not have followed us. A stranger then is still dogging us,
      just as a stranger dogged us in London. We have never shaken him
      off. If I could lay my hands upon that man, then at last we might
      find ourselves at the end of all our difficulties. To this one
      purpose I must now devote all my energies.

      My first impulse was to tell Sir Henry all my plans. My second
      and wisest one is to play my own game and speak as little as
      possible to anyone. He is silent and distrait. His nerves have
      been strangely shaken by that sound upon the moor. I will say
      nothing to add to his anxieties, but I will take my own steps to
      attain my own end.

      We had a small scene this morning after breakfast. Barrymore
      asked leave to speak with Sir Henry, and they were closeted in
      his study some little time. Sitting in the billiard-room I more
      than once heard the sound of voices raised, and I had a pretty
      good idea what the point was which was under discussion. After a
      time the baronet opened his door and called for me. “Barrymore
      considers that he has a grievance,” he said. “He thinks that it
      was unfair on our part to hunt his brother-in-law down when he,
      of his own free will, had told us the secret.”

      The butler was standing very pale but very collected before us.

      “I may have spoken too warmly, sir,” said he, “and if I have, I
      am sure that I beg your pardon. At the same time, I was very much
      surprised when I heard you two gentlemen come back this morning
      and learned that you had been chasing Selden. The poor fellow has
      enough to fight against without my putting more upon his track.”

      “If you had told us of your own free will it would have been a
      different thing,” said the baronet, “you only told us, or rather
      your wife only told us, when it was forced from you and you could
      not help yourself.”

      “I didn’t think you would have taken advantage of it, Sir
      Henry—indeed I didn’t.”

      “The man is a public danger. There are lonely houses scattered
      over the moor, and he is a fellow who would stick at nothing. You
      only want to get a glimpse of his face to see that. Look at Mr.
      Stapleton’s house, for example, with no one but himself to defend
      it. There’s no safety for anyone until he is under lock and key.”

      “He’ll break into no house, sir. I give you my solemn word upon
      that. But he will never trouble anyone in this country again. I
      assure you, Sir Henry, that in a very few days the necessary
      arrangements will have been made and he will be on his way to
      South America. For God’s sake, sir, I beg of you not to let the
      police know that he is still on the moor. They have given up the
      chase there, and he can lie quiet until the ship is ready for
      him. You can’t tell on him without getting my wife and me into
      trouble. I beg you, sir, to say nothing to the police.”

      “What do you say, Watson?”

      I shrugged my shoulders. “If he were safely out of the country it
      would relieve the tax-payer of a burden.”

      “But how about the chance of his holding someone up before he
      goes?”

      “He would not do anything so mad, sir. We have provided him with
      all that he can want. To commit a crime would be to show where he
      was hiding.”

      “That is true,” said Sir Henry. “Well, Barrymore—”

      “God bless you, sir, and thank you from my heart! It would have
      killed my poor wife had he been taken again.”

      “I guess we are aiding and abetting a felony, Watson? But, after
      what we have heard I don’t feel as if I could give the man up, so
      there is an end of it. All right, Barrymore, you can go.”

      With a few broken words of gratitude the man turned, but he
      hesitated and then came back.

      “You’ve been so kind to us, sir, that I should like to do the
      best I can for you in return. I know something, Sir Henry, and
      perhaps I should have said it before, but it was long after the
      inquest that I found it out. I’ve never breathed a word about it
      yet to mortal man. It’s about poor Sir Charles’s death.”

      The baronet and I were both upon our feet. “Do you know how he
      died?”

      “No, sir, I don’t know that.”

      “What then?”

      “I know why he was at the gate at that hour. It was to meet a
      woman.”

      “To meet a woman! He?”

      “Yes, sir.”

      “And the woman’s name?”

      “I can’t give you the name, sir, but I can give you the initials.
      Her initials were L. L.”

      “How do you know this, Barrymore?”

      “Well, Sir Henry, your uncle had a letter that morning. He had
      usually a great many letters, for he was a public man and well
      known for his kind heart, so that everyone who was in trouble was
      glad to turn to him. But that morning, as it chanced, there was
      only this one letter, so I took the more notice of it. It was
      from Coombe Tracey, and it was addressed in a woman’s hand.”

      “Well?”

      “Well, sir, I thought no more of the matter, and never would have
      done had it not been for my wife. Only a few weeks ago she was
      cleaning out Sir Charles’s study—it had never been touched since
      his death—and she found the ashes of a burned letter in the back
      of the grate. The greater part of it was charred to pieces, but
      one little slip, the end of a page, hung together, and the
      writing could still be read, though it was grey on a black
      ground. It seemed to us to be a postscript at the end of the
      letter and it said: ‘Please, please, as you are a gentleman, burn
      this letter, and be at the gate by ten o clock. Beneath it were
      signed the initials L. L.”

      “Have you got that slip?”

      “No, sir, it crumbled all to bits after we moved it.”

      “Had Sir Charles received any other letters in the same writing?”

      “Well, sir, I took no particular notice of his letters. I should
      not have noticed this one, only it happened to come alone.”

      “And you have no idea who L. L. is?”

      “No, sir. No more than you have. But I expect if we could lay our
      hands upon that lady we should know more about Sir Charles’s
      death.”

      “I cannot understand, Barrymore, how you came to conceal this
      important information.”

      “Well, sir, it was immediately after that our own trouble came to
      us. And then again, sir, we were both of us very fond of Sir
      Charles, as we well might be considering all that he has done for
      us. To rake this up couldn’t help our poor master, and it’s well
      to go carefully when there’s a lady in the case. Even the best of
      us—”

      “You thought it might injure his reputation?”

      “Well, sir, I thought no good could come of it. But now you have
      been kind to us, and I feel as if it would be treating you
      unfairly not to tell you all that I know about the matter.”

      “Very good, Barrymore; you can go.” When the butler had left us
      Sir Henry turned to me. “Well, Watson, what do you think of this
      new light?”

      “It seems to leave the darkness rather blacker than before.”

      “So I think. But if we can only trace L. L. it should clear up
      the whole business. We have gained that much. We know that there
      is someone who has the facts if we can only find her. What do you
      think we should do?”

      “Let Holmes know all about it at once. It will give him the clue
      for which he has been seeking. I am much mistaken if it does not
      bring him down.”

      I went at once to my room and drew up my report of the morning’s
      conversation for Holmes. It was evident to me that he had been
      very busy of late, for the notes which I had from Baker Street
      were few and short, with no comments upon the information which I
      had supplied and hardly any reference to my mission. No doubt his
      blackmailing case is absorbing all his faculties. And yet this
      new factor must surely arrest his attention and renew his
      interest. I wish that he were here.

      _October_ 17_th_.—All day today the rain poured down, rustling on
      the ivy and dripping from the eaves. I thought of the convict out
      upon the bleak, cold, shelterless moor. Poor devil! Whatever his
      crimes, he has suffered something to atone for them. And then I
      thought of that other one—the face in the cab, the figure against
      the moon. Was he also out in that deluge—the unseen watcher, the
      man of darkness? In the evening I put on my waterproof and I
      walked far upon the sodden moor, full of dark imaginings, the
      rain beating upon my face and the wind whistling about my ears.
      God help those who wander into the great mire now, for even the
      firm uplands are becoming a morass. I found the black tor upon
      which I had seen the solitary watcher, and from its craggy summit
      I looked out myself across the melancholy downs. Rain squalls
      drifted across their russet face, and the heavy, slate-coloured
      clouds hung low over the landscape, trailing in grey wreaths down
      the sides of the fantastic hills. In the distant hollow on the
      left, half hidden by the mist, the two thin towers of Baskerville
      Hall rose above the trees. They were the only signs of human life
      which I could see, save only those prehistoric huts which lay
      thickly upon the slopes of the hills. Nowhere was there any trace
      of that lonely man whom I had seen on the same spot two nights
      before.

      As I walked back I was overtaken by Dr. Mortimer driving in his
      dog-cart over a rough moorland track which led from the outlying
      farmhouse of Foulmire. He has been very attentive to us, and
      hardly a day has passed that he has not called at the Hall to see
      how we were getting on. He insisted upon my climbing into his
      dog-cart, and he gave me a lift homeward. I found him much
      troubled over the disappearance of his little spaniel. It had
      wandered on to the moor and had never come back. I gave him such
      consolation as I might, but I thought of the pony on the Grimpen
      Mire, and I do not fancy that he will see his little dog again.

      “By the way, Mortimer,” said I as we jolted along the rough road,
      “I suppose there are few people living within driving distance of
      this whom you do not know?”

      “Hardly any, I think.”

      “Can you, then, tell me the name of any woman whose initials are
      L. L.?”

      He thought for a few minutes.

      “No,” said he. “There are a few gipsies and labouring folk for
      whom I can’t answer, but among the farmers or gentry there is no
      one whose initials are those. Wait a bit though,” he added after
      a pause. “There is Laura Lyons—her initials are L. L.—but she
      lives in Coombe Tracey.”

      “Who is she?” I asked.

      “She is Frankland’s daughter.”

      “What! Old Frankland the crank?”

      “Exactly. She married an artist named Lyons, who came sketching
      on the moor. He proved to be a blackguard and deserted her. The
      fault from what I hear may not have been entirely on one side.
      Her father refused to have anything to do with her because she
      had married without his consent and perhaps for one or two other
      reasons as well. So, between the old sinner and the young one the
      girl has had a pretty bad time.”

      “How does she live?”

      “I fancy old Frankland allows her a pittance, but it cannot be
      more, for his own affairs are considerably involved. Whatever she
      may have deserved one could not allow her to go hopelessly to the
      bad. Her story got about, and several of the people here did
      something to enable her to earn an honest living. Stapleton did
      for one, and Sir Charles for another. I gave a trifle myself. It
      was to set her up in a typewriting business.”

      He wanted to know the object of my inquiries, but I managed to
      satisfy his curiosity without telling him too much, for there is
      no reason why we should take anyone into our confidence. Tomorrow
      morning I shall find my way to Coombe Tracey, and if I can see
      this Mrs. Laura Lyons, of equivocal reputation, a long step will
      have been made towards clearing one incident in this chain of
      mysteries. I am certainly developing the wisdom of the serpent,
      for when Mortimer pressed his questions to an inconvenient extent
      I asked him casually to what type Frankland’s skull belonged, and
      so heard nothing but craniology for the rest of our drive. I have
      not lived for years with Sherlock Holmes for nothing.

      I have only one other incident to record upon this tempestuous
      and melancholy day. This was my conversation with Barrymore just
      now, which gives me one more strong card which I can play in due
      time.

      Mortimer had stayed to dinner, and he and the baronet played
      écarté afterwards. The butler brought me my coffee into the
      library, and I took the chance to ask him a few questions.

      “Well,” said I, “has this precious relation of yours departed, or
      is he still lurking out yonder?”

      “I don’t know, sir. I hope to heaven that he has gone, for he has
      brought nothing but trouble here! I’ve not heard of him since I
      left out food for him last, and that was three days ago.”

      “Did you see him then?”

      “No, sir, but the food was gone when next I went that way.”

      “Then he was certainly there?”

      “So you would think, sir, unless it was the other man who took
      it.”

      I sat with my coffee-cup halfway to my lips and stared at
      Barrymore.

      “You know that there is another man then?”

      “Yes, sir; there is another man upon the moor.”

      “Have you seen him?”

      “No, sir.”

      “How do you know of him then?”

      “Selden told me of him, sir, a week ago or more. He’s in hiding,
      too, but he’s not a convict as far as I can make out. I don’t
      like it, Dr. Watson—I tell you straight, sir, that I don’t like
      it.” He spoke with a sudden passion of earnestness.

      “Now, listen to me, Barrymore! I have no interest in this matter
      but that of your master. I have come here with no object except
      to help him. Tell me, frankly, what it is that you don’t like.”

      Barrymore hesitated for a moment, as if he regretted his outburst
      or found it difficult to express his own feelings in words.

      “It’s all these goings-on, sir,” he cried at last, waving his
      hand towards the rain-lashed window which faced the moor.
      “There’s foul play somewhere, and there’s black villainy brewing,
      to that I’ll swear! Very glad I should be, sir, to see Sir Henry
      on his way back to London again!”

      “But what is it that alarms you?”

      “Look at Sir Charles’s death! That was bad enough, for all that
      the coroner said. Look at the noises on the moor at night.
      There’s not a man would cross it after sundown if he was paid for
      it. Look at this stranger hiding out yonder, and watching and
      waiting! What’s he waiting for? What does it mean? It means no
      good to anyone of the name of Baskerville, and very glad I shall
      be to be quit of it all on the day that Sir Henry’s new servants
      are ready to take over the Hall.”

      “But about this stranger,” said I. “Can you tell me anything
      about him? What did Selden say? Did he find out where he hid, or
      what he was doing?”

      “He saw him once or twice, but he is a deep one and gives nothing
      away. At first he thought that he was the police, but soon he
      found that he had some lay of his own. A kind of gentleman he
      was, as far as he could see, but what he was doing he could not
      make out.”

      “And where did he say that he lived?”

      “Among the old houses on the hillside—the stone huts where the
      old folk used to live.”

      “But how about his food?”

      “Selden found out that he has got a lad who works for him and
      brings all he needs. I dare say he goes to Coombe Tracey for what
      he wants.”

      “Very good, Barrymore. We may talk further of this some other
      time.” When the butler had gone I walked over to the black
      window, and I looked through a blurred pane at the driving clouds
      and at the tossing outline of the wind-swept trees. It is a wild
      night indoors, and what must it be in a stone hut upon the moor.
      What passion of hatred can it be which leads a man to lurk in
      such a place at such a time! And what deep and earnest purpose
      can he have which calls for such a trial! There, in that hut upon
      the moor, seems to lie the very centre of that problem which has
      vexed me so sorely. I swear that another day shall not have
      passed before I have done all that man can do to reach the heart
      of the mystery.




Chapter 11.
The Man on the Tor


      The extract from my private diary which forms the last chapter
      has brought my narrative up to the eighteenth of October, a time
      when these strange events began to move swiftly towards their
      terrible conclusion. The incidents of the next few days are
      indelibly graven upon my recollection, and I can tell them
      without reference to the notes made at the time. I start them
      from the day which succeeded that upon which I had established
      two facts of great importance, the one that Mrs. Laura Lyons of
      Coombe Tracey had written to Sir Charles Baskerville and made an
      appointment with him at the very place and hour that he met his
      death, the other that the lurking man upon the moor was to be
      found among the stone huts upon the hillside. With these two
      facts in my possession I felt that either my intelligence or my
      courage must be deficient if I could not throw some further light
      upon these dark places.

      I had no opportunity to tell the baronet what I had learned about
      Mrs. Lyons upon the evening before, for Dr. Mortimer remained
      with him at cards until it was very late. At breakfast, however,
      I informed him about my discovery and asked him whether he would
      care to accompany me to Coombe Tracey. At first he was very eager
      to come, but on second thoughts it seemed to both of us that if I
      went alone the results might be better. The more formal we made
      the visit the less information we might obtain. I left Sir Henry
      behind, therefore, not without some prickings of conscience, and
      drove off upon my new quest.

      When I reached Coombe Tracey I told Perkins to put up the horses,
      and I made inquiries for the lady whom I had come to interrogate.
      I had no difficulty in finding her rooms, which were central and
      well appointed. A maid showed me in without ceremony, and as I
      entered the sitting-room a lady, who was sitting before a
      Remington typewriter, sprang up with a pleasant smile of welcome.
      Her face fell, however, when she saw that I was a stranger, and
      she sat down again and asked me the object of my visit.

      The first impression left by Mrs. Lyons was one of extreme
      beauty. Her eyes and hair were of the same rich hazel colour, and
      her cheeks, though considerably freckled, were flushed with the
      exquisite bloom of the brunette, the dainty pink which lurks at
      the heart of the sulphur rose. Admiration was, I repeat, the
      first impression. But the second was criticism. There was
      something subtly wrong with the face, some coarseness of
      expression, some hardness, perhaps, of eye, some looseness of lip
      which marred its perfect beauty. But these, of course, are
      afterthoughts. At the moment I was simply conscious that I was in
      the presence of a very handsome woman, and that she was asking me
      the reasons for my visit. I had not quite understood until that
      instant how delicate my mission was.

      “I have the pleasure,” said I, “of knowing your father.”

      It was a clumsy introduction, and the lady made me feel it.
      “There is nothing in common between my father and me,” she said.
      “I owe him nothing, and his friends are not mine. If it were not
      for the late Sir Charles Baskerville and some other kind hearts I
      might have starved for all that my father cared.”

      “It was about the late Sir Charles Baskerville that I have come
      here to see you.”

      The freckles started out on the lady’s face.

      “What can I tell you about him?” she asked, and her fingers
      played nervously over the stops of her typewriter.

      “You knew him, did you not?”

      “I have already said that I owe a great deal to his kindness. If
      I am able to support myself it is largely due to the interest
      which he took in my unhappy situation.”

      “Did you correspond with him?”

      The lady looked quickly up with an angry gleam in her hazel eyes.

      “What is the object of these questions?” she asked sharply.

      “The object is to avoid a public scandal. It is better that I
      should ask them here than that the matter should pass outside our
      control.”

      She was silent and her face was still very pale. At last she
      looked up with something reckless and defiant in her manner.

      “Well, I’ll answer,” she said. “What are your questions?”

      “Did you correspond with Sir Charles?”

      “I certainly wrote to him once or twice to acknowledge his
      delicacy and his generosity.”

      “Have you the dates of those letters?”

      “No.”

      “Have you ever met him?”

      “Yes, once or twice, when he came into Coombe Tracey. He was a
      very retiring man, and he preferred to do good by stealth.”

      “But if you saw him so seldom and wrote so seldom, how did he
      know enough about your affairs to be able to help you, as you say
      that he has done?”

      She met my difficulty with the utmost readiness.

      “There were several gentlemen who knew my sad history and united
      to help me. One was Mr. Stapleton, a neighbour and intimate
      friend of Sir Charles’s. He was exceedingly kind, and it was
      through him that Sir Charles learned about my affairs.”

      I knew already that Sir Charles Baskerville had made Stapleton
      his almoner upon several occasions, so the lady’s statement bore
      the impress of truth upon it.

      “Did you ever write to Sir Charles asking him to meet you?” I
      continued.

      Mrs. Lyons flushed with anger again. “Really, sir, this is a very
      extraordinary question.”

      “I am sorry, madam, but I must repeat it.”

      “Then I answer, certainly not.”

      “Not on the very day of Sir Charles’s death?”

      The flush had faded in an instant, and a deathly face was before
      me. Her dry lips could not speak the “No” which I saw rather than
      heard.

      “Surely your memory deceives you,” said I. “I could even quote a
      passage of your letter. It ran ‘Please, please, as you are a
      gentleman, burn this letter, and be at the gate by ten o’clock.’”

      I thought that she had fainted, but she recovered herself by a
      supreme effort.

      “Is there no such thing as a gentleman?” she gasped.

      “You do Sir Charles an injustice. He _did_ burn the letter. But
      sometimes a letter may be legible even when burned. You
      acknowledge now that you wrote it?”

      “Yes, I did write it,” she cried, pouring out her soul in a
      torrent of words. “I did write it. Why should I deny it? I have
      no reason to be ashamed of it. I wished him to help me. I
      believed that if I had an interview I could gain his help, so I
      asked him to meet me.”

      “But why at such an hour?”

      “Because I had only just learned that he was going to London next
      day and might be away for months. There were reasons why I could
      not get there earlier.”

      “But why a rendezvous in the garden instead of a visit to the
      house?”

      “Do you think a woman could go alone at that hour to a bachelor’s
      house?”

      “Well, what happened when you did get there?”

      “I never went.”

      “Mrs. Lyons!”

      “No, I swear it to you on all I hold sacred. I never went.
      Something intervened to prevent my going.”

      “What was that?”

      “That is a private matter. I cannot tell it.”

      “You acknowledge then that you made an appointment with Sir
      Charles at the very hour and place at which he met his death, but
      you deny that you kept the appointment.”

      “That is the truth.”

      Again and again I cross-questioned her, but I could never get
      past that point.

      “Mrs. Lyons,” said I as I rose from this long and inconclusive
      interview, “you are taking a very great responsibility and
      putting yourself in a very false position by not making an
      absolutely clean breast of all that you know. If I have to call
      in the aid of the police you will find how seriously you are
      compromised. If your position is innocent, why did you in the
      first instance deny having written to Sir Charles upon that
      date?”

      “Because I feared that some false conclusion might be drawn from
      it and that I might find myself involved in a scandal.”

      “And why were you so pressing that Sir Charles should destroy
      your letter?”

      “If you have read the letter you will know.”

      “I did not say that I had read all the letter.”

      “You quoted some of it.”

      “I quoted the postscript. The letter had, as I said, been burned
      and it was not all legible. I ask you once again why it was that
      you were so pressing that Sir Charles should destroy this letter
      which he received on the day of his death.”

      “The matter is a very private one.”

      “The more reason why you should avoid a public investigation.”

      “I will tell you, then. If you have heard anything of my unhappy
      history you will know that I made a rash marriage and had reason
      to regret it.”

      “I have heard so much.”

      “My life has been one incessant persecution from a husband whom I
      abhor. The law is upon his side, and every day I am faced by the
      possibility that he may force me to live with him. At the time
      that I wrote this letter to Sir Charles I had learned that there
      was a prospect of my regaining my freedom if certain expenses
      could be met. It meant everything to me—peace of mind, happiness,
      self-respect—everything. I knew Sir Charles’s generosity, and I
      thought that if he heard the story from my own lips he would help
      me.”

      “Then how is it that you did not go?”

      “Because I received help in the interval from another source.”

      “Why then, did you not write to Sir Charles and explain this?”

      “So I should have done had I not seen his death in the paper next
      morning.”

      The woman’s story hung coherently together, and all my questions
      were unable to shake it. I could only check it by finding if she
      had, indeed, instituted divorce proceedings against her husband
      at or about the time of the tragedy.

      It was unlikely that she would dare to say that she had not been
      to Baskerville Hall if she really had been, for a trap would be
      necessary to take her there, and could not have returned to
      Coombe Tracey until the early hours of the morning. Such an
      excursion could not be kept secret. The probability was,
      therefore, that she was telling the truth, or, at least, a part
      of the truth. I came away baffled and disheartened. Once again I
      had reached that dead wall which seemed to be built across every
      path by which I tried to get at the object of my mission. And yet
      the more I thought of the lady’s face and of her manner the more
      I felt that something was being held back from me. Why should she
      turn so pale? Why should she fight against every admission until
      it was forced from her? Why should she have been so reticent at
      the time of the tragedy? Surely the explanation of all this could
      not be as innocent as she would have me believe. For the moment I
      could proceed no farther in that direction, but must turn back to
      that other clue which was to be sought for among the stone huts
      upon the moor.

      And that was a most vague direction. I realised it as I drove
      back and noted how hill after hill showed traces of the ancient
      people. Barrymore’s only indication had been that the stranger
      lived in one of these abandoned huts, and many hundreds of them
      are scattered throughout the length and breadth of the moor. But
      I had my own experience for a guide since it had shown me the man
      himself standing upon the summit of the Black Tor. That, then,
      should be the centre of my search. From there I should explore
      every hut upon the moor until I lighted upon the right one. If
      this man were inside it I should find out from his own lips, at
      the point of my revolver if necessary, who he was and why he had
      dogged us so long. He might slip away from us in the crowd of
      Regent Street, but it would puzzle him to do so upon the lonely
      moor. On the other hand, if I should find the hut and its tenant
      should not be within it I must remain there, however long the
      vigil, until he returned. Holmes had missed him in London. It
      would indeed be a triumph for me if I could run him to earth
      where my master had failed.

      Luck had been against us again and again in this inquiry, but now
      at last it came to my aid. And the messenger of good fortune was
      none other than Mr. Frankland, who was standing, grey-whiskered
      and red-faced, outside the gate of his garden, which opened on to
      the highroad along which I travelled.

      “Good-day, Dr. Watson,” cried he with unwonted good humour, “you
      must really give your horses a rest and come in to have a glass
      of wine and to congratulate me.”

      My feelings towards him were very far from being friendly after
      what I had heard of his treatment of his daughter, but I was
      anxious to send Perkins and the wagonette home, and the
      opportunity was a good one. I alighted and sent a message to Sir
      Henry that I should walk over in time for dinner. Then I followed
      Frankland into his dining-room.

      “It is a great day for me, sir—one of the red-letter days of my
      life,” he cried with many chuckles. “I have brought off a double
      event. I mean to teach them in these parts that law is law, and
      that there is a man here who does not fear to invoke it. I have
      established a right of way through the centre of old Middleton’s
      park, slap across it, sir, within a hundred yards of his own
      front door. What do you think of that? We’ll teach these magnates
      that they cannot ride roughshod over the rights of the commoners,
      confound them! And I’ve closed the wood where the Fernworthy folk
      used to picnic. These infernal people seem to think that there
      are no rights of property, and that they can swarm where they
      like with their papers and their bottles. Both cases decided, Dr.
      Watson, and both in my favour. I haven’t had such a day since I
      had Sir John Morland for trespass because he shot in his own
      warren.”

      “How on earth did you do that?”

      “Look it up in the books, sir. It will repay reading—Frankland
      _v_. Morland, Court of Queen’s Bench. It cost me £200, but I got
      my verdict.”

      “Did it do you any good?”

      “None, sir, none. I am proud to say that I had no interest in the
      matter. I act entirely from a sense of public duty. I have no
      doubt, for example, that the Fernworthy people will burn me in
      effigy tonight. I told the police last time they did it that they
      should stop these disgraceful exhibitions. The County
      Constabulary is in a scandalous state, sir, and it has not
      afforded me the protection to which I am entitled. The case of
      Frankland _v_. Regina will bring the matter before the attention
      of the public. I told them that they would have occasion to
      regret their treatment of me, and already my words have come
      true.”

      “How so?” I asked.

      The old man put on a very knowing expression. “Because I could
      tell them what they are dying to know; but nothing would induce
      me to help the rascals in any way.”

      I had been casting round for some excuse by which I could get
      away from his gossip, but now I began to wish to hear more of it.
      I had seen enough of the contrary nature of the old sinner to
      understand that any strong sign of interest would be the surest
      way to stop his confidences.

      “Some poaching case, no doubt?” said I with an indifferent
      manner.

      “Ha, ha, my boy, a very much more important matter than that!
      What about the convict on the moor?”

      I stared. “You don’t mean that you know where he is?” said I.

      “I may not know exactly where he is, but I am quite sure that I
      could help the police to lay their hands on him. Has it never
      struck you that the way to catch that man was to find out where
      he got his food and so trace it to him?”

      He certainly seemed to be getting uncomfortably near the truth.
      “No doubt,” said I; “but how do you know that he is anywhere upon
      the moor?”

      “I know it because I have seen with my own eyes the messenger who
      takes him his food.”

      My heart sank for Barrymore. It was a serious thing to be in the
      power of this spiteful old busybody. But his next remark took a
      weight from my mind.

      “You’ll be surprised to hear that his food is taken to him by a
      child. I see him every day through my telescope upon the roof. He
      passes along the same path at the same hour, and to whom should
      he be going except to the convict?”

      Here was luck indeed! And yet I suppressed all appearance of
      interest. A child! Barrymore had said that our unknown was
      supplied by a boy. It was on his track, and not upon the
      convict’s, that Frankland had stumbled. If I could get his
      knowledge it might save me a long and weary hunt. But incredulity
      and indifference were evidently my strongest cards.

      “I should say that it was much more likely that it was the son of
      one of the moorland shepherds taking out his father’s dinner.”

      The least appearance of opposition struck fire out of the old
      autocrat. His eyes looked malignantly at me, and his grey
      whiskers bristled like those of an angry cat.

      “Indeed, sir!” said he, pointing out over the wide-stretching
      moor. “Do you see that Black Tor over yonder? Well, do you see
      the low hill beyond with the thornbush upon it? It is the
      stoniest part of the whole moor. Is that a place where a shepherd
      would be likely to take his station? Your suggestion, sir, is a
      most absurd one.”

      I meekly answered that I had spoken without knowing all the
      facts. My submission pleased him and led him to further
      confidences.

      “You may be sure, sir, that I have very good grounds before I
      come to an opinion. I have seen the boy again and again with his
      bundle. Every day, and sometimes twice a day, I have been
      able—but wait a moment, Dr. Watson. Do my eyes deceive me, or is
      there at the present moment something moving upon that hillside?”

      It was several miles off, but I could distinctly see a small dark
      dot against the dull green and grey.

      “Come, sir, come!” cried Frankland, rushing upstairs. “You will
      see with your own eyes and judge for yourself.”

      The telescope, a formidable instrument mounted upon a tripod,
      stood upon the flat leads of the house. Frankland clapped his eye
      to it and gave a cry of satisfaction.

      “Quick, Dr. Watson, quick, before he passes over the hill!”

      There he was, sure enough, a small urchin with a little bundle
      upon his shoulder, toiling slowly up the hill. When he reached
      the crest I saw the ragged uncouth figure outlined for an instant
      against the cold blue sky. He looked round him with a furtive and
      stealthy air, as one who dreads pursuit. Then he vanished over
      the hill.

      “Well! Am I right?”

      “Certainly, there is a boy who seems to have some secret errand.”

      “And what the errand is even a county constable could guess. But
      not one word shall they have from me, and I bind you to secrecy
      also, Dr. Watson. Not a word! You understand!”

      “Just as you wish.”

      “They have treated me shamefully—shamefully. When the facts come
      out in Frankland _v_. Regina I venture to think that a thrill of
      indignation will run through the country. Nothing would induce me
      to help the police in any way. For all they cared it might have
      been me, instead of my effigy, which these rascals burned at the
      stake. Surely you are not going! You will help me to empty the
      decanter in honour of this great occasion!”

      But I resisted all his solicitations and succeeded in dissuading
      him from his announced intention of walking home with me. I kept
      the road as long as his eye was on me, and then I struck off
      across the moor and made for the stony hill over which the boy
      had disappeared. Everything was working in my favour, and I swore
      that it should not be through lack of energy or perseverance that
      I should miss the chance which fortune had thrown in my way.

      The sun was already sinking when I reached the summit of the
      hill, and the long slopes beneath me were all golden-green on one
      side and grey shadow on the other. A haze lay low upon the
      farthest sky-line, out of which jutted the fantastic shapes of
      Belliver and Vixen Tor. Over the wide expanse there was no sound
      and no movement. One great grey bird, a gull or curlew, soared
      aloft in the blue heaven. He and I seemed to be the only living
      things between the huge arch of the sky and the desert beneath
      it. The barren scene, the sense of loneliness, and the mystery
      and urgency of my task all struck a chill into my heart. The boy
      was nowhere to be seen. But down beneath me in a cleft of the
      hills there was a circle of the old stone huts, and in the middle
      of them there was one which retained sufficient roof to act as a
      screen against the weather. My heart leaped within me as I saw
      it. This must be the burrow where the stranger lurked. At last my
      foot was on the threshold of his hiding place—his secret was
      within my grasp.

      As I approached the hut, walking as warily as Stapleton would do
      when with poised net he drew near the settled butterfly, I
      satisfied myself that the place had indeed been used as a
      habitation. A vague pathway among the boulders led to the
      dilapidated opening which served as a door. All was silent
      within. The unknown might be lurking there, or he might be
      prowling on the moor. My nerves tingled with the sense of
      adventure. Throwing aside my cigarette, I closed my hand upon the
      butt of my revolver and, walking swiftly up to the door, I looked
      in. The place was empty.

      But there were ample signs that I had not come upon a false
      scent. This was certainly where the man lived. Some blankets
      rolled in a waterproof lay upon that very stone slab upon which
      Neolithic man had once slumbered. The ashes of a fire were heaped
      in a rude grate. Beside it lay some cooking utensils and a bucket
      half-full of water. A litter of empty tins showed that the place
      had been occupied for some time, and I saw, as my eyes became
      accustomed to the checkered light, a pannikin and a half-full
      bottle of spirits standing in the corner. In the middle of the
      hut a flat stone served the purpose of a table, and upon this
      stood a small cloth bundle—the same, no doubt, which I had seen
      through the telescope upon the shoulder of the boy. It contained
      a loaf of bread, a tinned tongue, and two tins of preserved
      peaches. As I set it down again, after having examined it, my
      heart leaped to see that beneath it there lay a sheet of paper
      with writing upon it. I raised it, and this was what I read,
      roughly scrawled in pencil: “Dr. Watson has gone to Coombe
      Tracey.”

      For a minute I stood there with the paper in my hands thinking
      out the meaning of this curt message. It was I, then, and not Sir
      Henry, who was being dogged by this secret man. He had not
      followed me himself, but he had set an agent—the boy,
      perhaps—upon my track, and this was his report. Possibly I had
      taken no step since I had been upon the moor which had not been
      observed and reported. Always there was this feeling of an unseen
      force, a fine net drawn round us with infinite skill and
      delicacy, holding us so lightly that it was only at some supreme
      moment that one realised that one was indeed entangled in its
      meshes.

      If there was one report there might be others, so I looked round
      the hut in search of them. There was no trace, however, of
      anything of the kind, nor could I discover any sign which might
      indicate the character or intentions of the man who lived in this
      singular place, save that he must be of Spartan habits and cared
      little for the comforts of life. When I thought of the heavy
      rains and looked at the gaping roof I understood how strong and
      immutable must be the purpose which had kept him in that
      inhospitable abode. Was he our malignant enemy, or was he by
      chance our guardian angel? I swore that I would not leave the hut
      until I knew.

      Outside the sun was sinking low and the west was blazing with
      scarlet and gold. Its reflection was shot back in ruddy patches
      by the distant pools which lay amid the great Grimpen Mire. There
      were the two towers of Baskerville Hall, and there a distant blur
      of smoke which marked the village of Grimpen. Between the two,
      behind the hill, was the house of the Stapletons. All was sweet
      and mellow and peaceful in the golden evening light, and yet as I
      looked at them my soul shared none of the peace of Nature but
      quivered at the vagueness and the terror of that interview which
      every instant was bringing nearer. With tingling nerves but a
      fixed purpose, I sat in the dark recess of the hut and waited
      with sombre patience for the coming of its tenant.

      And then at last I heard him. Far away came the sharp clink of a
      boot striking upon a stone. Then another and yet another, coming
      nearer and nearer. I shrank back into the darkest corner and
      cocked the pistol in my pocket, determined not to discover myself
      until I had an opportunity of seeing something of the stranger.
      There was a long pause which showed that he had stopped. Then
      once more the footsteps approached and a shadow fell across the
      opening of the hut.

      “It is a lovely evening, my dear Watson,” said a well-known
      voice. “I really think that you will be more comfortable outside
      than in.”




Chapter 12.
Death on the Moor


      For a moment or two I sat breathless, hardly able to believe my
      ears. Then my senses and my voice came back to me, while a
      crushing weight of responsibility seemed in an instant to be
      lifted from my soul. That cold, incisive, ironical voice could
      belong to but one man in all the world.

      “Holmes!” I cried—“Holmes!”

      “Come out,” said he, “and please be careful with the revolver.”

      I stooped under the rude lintel, and there he sat upon a stone
      outside, his grey eyes dancing with amusement as they fell upon
      my astonished features. He was thin and worn, but clear and
      alert, his keen face bronzed by the sun and roughened by the
      wind. In his tweed suit and cloth cap he looked like any other
      tourist upon the moor, and he had contrived, with that catlike
      love of personal cleanliness which was one of his
      characteristics, that his chin should be as smooth and his linen
      as perfect as if he were in Baker Street.

      “I never was more glad to see anyone in my life,” said I as I
      wrung him by the hand.

      “Or more astonished, eh?”

      “Well, I must confess to it.”

      “The surprise was not all on one side, I assure you. I had no
      idea that you had found my occasional retreat, still less that
      you were inside it, until I was within twenty paces of the door.”

      “My footprint, I presume?”

      “No, Watson, I fear that I could not undertake to recognize your
      footprint amid all the footprints of the world. If you seriously
      desire to deceive me you must change your tobacconist; for when I
      see the stub of a cigarette marked Bradley, Oxford Street, I know
      that my friend Watson is in the neighbourhood. You will see it
      there beside the path. You threw it down, no doubt, at that
      supreme moment when you charged into the empty hut.”

      “Exactly.”

      “I thought as much—and knowing your admirable tenacity I was
      convinced that you were sitting in ambush, a weapon within reach,
      waiting for the tenant to return. So you actually thought that I
      was the criminal?”

      “I did not know who you were, but I was determined to find out.”

      “Excellent, Watson! And how did you localise me? You saw me,
      perhaps, on the night of the convict hunt, when I was so
      imprudent as to allow the moon to rise behind me?”

      “Yes, I saw you then.”

      “And have no doubt searched all the huts until you came to this
      one?”

      “No, your boy had been observed, and that gave me a guide where
      to look.”

      “The old gentleman with the telescope, no doubt. I could not make
      it out when first I saw the light flashing upon the lens.” He
      rose and peeped into the hut. “Ha, I see that Cartwright has
      brought up some supplies. What’s this paper? So you have been to
      Coombe Tracey, have you?”

      “Yes.”

      “To see Mrs. Laura Lyons?”

      “Exactly.”

      “Well done! Our researches have evidently been running on
      parallel lines, and when we unite our results I expect we shall
      have a fairly full knowledge of the case.”

      “Well, I am glad from my heart that you are here, for indeed the
      responsibility and the mystery were both becoming too much for my
      nerves. But how in the name of wonder did you come here, and what
      have you been doing? I thought that you were in Baker Street
      working out that case of blackmailing.”

      “That was what I wished you to think.”

      “Then you use me, and yet do not trust me!” I cried with some
      bitterness. “I think that I have deserved better at your hands,
      Holmes.”

      “My dear fellow, you have been invaluable to me in this as in
      many other cases, and I beg that you will forgive me if I have
      seemed to play a trick upon you. In truth, it was partly for your
      own sake that I did it, and it was my appreciation of the danger
      which you ran which led me to come down and examine the matter
      for myself. Had I been with Sir Henry and you it is confident
      that my point of view would have been the same as yours, and my
      presence would have warned our very formidable opponents to be on
      their guard. As it is, I have been able to get about as I could
      not possibly have done had I been living in the Hall, and I
      remain an unknown factor in the business, ready to throw in all
      my weight at a critical moment.”

      “But why keep me in the dark?”

      “For you to know could not have helped us and might possibly have
      led to my discovery. You would have wished to tell me something,
      or in your kindness you would have brought me out some comfort or
      other, and so an unnecessary risk would be run. I brought
      Cartwright down with me—you remember the little chap at the
      express office—and he has seen after my simple wants: a loaf of
      bread and a clean collar. What does man want more? He has given
      me an extra pair of eyes upon a very active pair of feet, and
      both have been invaluable.”

      “Then my reports have all been wasted!”—My voice trembled as I
      recalled the pains and the pride with which I had composed them.

      Holmes took a bundle of papers from his pocket.

      “Here are your reports, my dear fellow, and very well thumbed, I
      assure you. I made excellent arrangements, and they are only
      delayed one day upon their way. I must compliment you exceedingly
      upon the zeal and the intelligence which you have shown over an
      extraordinarily difficult case.”

      I was still rather raw over the deception which had been
      practised upon me, but the warmth of Holmes’s praise drove my
      anger from my mind. I felt also in my heart that he was right in
      what he said and that it was really best for our purpose that I
      should not have known that he was upon the moor.

      “That’s better,” said he, seeing the shadow rise from my face.
      “And now tell me the result of your visit to Mrs. Laura Lyons—it
      was not difficult for me to guess that it was to see her that you
      had gone, for I am already aware that she is the one person in
      Coombe Tracey who might be of service to us in the matter. In
      fact, if you had not gone today it is exceedingly probable that I
      should have gone tomorrow.”

      The sun had set and dusk was settling over the moor. The air had
      turned chill and we withdrew into the hut for warmth. There,
      sitting together in the twilight, I told Holmes of my
      conversation with the lady. So interested was he that I had to
      repeat some of it twice before he was satisfied.

      “This is most important,” said he when I had concluded. “It fills
      up a gap which I had been unable to bridge in this most complex
      affair. You are aware, perhaps, that a close intimacy exists
      between this lady and the man Stapleton?”

      “I did not know of a close intimacy.”

      “There can be no doubt about the matter. They meet, they write,
      there is a complete understanding between them. Now, this puts a
      very powerful weapon into our hands. If I could only use it to
      detach his wife—”

      “His wife?”

      “I am giving you some information now, in return for all that you
      have given me. The lady who has passed here as Miss Stapleton is
      in reality his wife.”

      “Good heavens, Holmes! Are you sure of what you say? How could he
      have permitted Sir Henry to fall in love with her?”

      “Sir Henry’s falling in love could do no harm to anyone except
      Sir Henry. He took particular care that Sir Henry did not make
      love to her, as you have yourself observed. I repeat that the
      lady is his wife and not his sister.”

      “But why this elaborate deception?”

      “Because he foresaw that she would be very much more useful to
      him in the character of a free woman.”

      All my unspoken instincts, my vague suspicions, suddenly took
      shape and centred upon the naturalist. In that impassive
      colourless man, with his straw hat and his butterfly-net, I
      seemed to see something terrible—a creature of infinite patience
      and craft, with a smiling face and a murderous heart.

      “It is he, then, who is our enemy—it is he who dogged us in
      London?”

      “So I read the riddle.”

      “And the warning—it must have come from her!”

      “Exactly.”

      The shape of some monstrous villainy, half seen, half guessed,
      loomed through the darkness which had girt me so long.

      “But are you sure of this, Holmes? How do you know that the woman
      is his wife?”

      “Because he so far forgot himself as to tell you a true piece of
      autobiography upon the occasion when he first met you, and I dare
      say he has many a time regretted it since. He was once a
      schoolmaster in the north of England. Now, there is no one more
      easy to trace than a schoolmaster. There are scholastic agencies
      by which one may identify any man who has been in the profession.
      A little investigation showed me that a school had come to grief
      under atrocious circumstances, and that the man who had owned
      it—the name was different—had disappeared with his wife. The
      descriptions agreed. When I learned that the missing man was
      devoted to entomology the identification was complete.”

      The darkness was rising, but much was still hidden by the
      shadows.

      “If this woman is in truth his wife, where does Mrs. Laura Lyons
      come in?” I asked.

      “That is one of the points upon which your own researches have
      shed a light. Your interview with the lady has cleared the
      situation very much. I did not know about a projected divorce
      between herself and her husband. In that case, regarding
      Stapleton as an unmarried man, she counted no doubt upon becoming
      his wife.”

      “And when she is undeceived?”

      “Why, then we may find the lady of service. It must be our first
      duty to see her—both of us—tomorrow. Don’t you think, Watson,
      that you are away from your charge rather long? Your place should
      be at Baskerville Hall.”

      The last red streaks had faded away in the west and night had
      settled upon the moor. A few faint stars were gleaming in a
      violet sky.

      “One last question, Holmes,” I said as I rose. “Surely there is
      no need of secrecy between you and me. What is the meaning of it
      all? What is he after?”

      Holmes’s voice sank as he answered:

      “It is murder, Watson—refined, cold-blooded, deliberate murder.
      Do not ask me for particulars. My nets are closing upon him, even
      as his are upon Sir Henry, and with your help he is already
      almost at my mercy. There is but one danger which can threaten
      us. It is that he should strike before we are ready to do so.
      Another day—two at the most—and I have my case complete, but
      until then guard your charge as closely as ever a fond mother
      watched her ailing child. Your mission today has justified
      itself, and yet I could almost wish that you had not left his
      side. Hark!”

      A terrible scream—a prolonged yell of horror and anguish—burst
      out of the silence of the moor. That frightful cry turned the
      blood to ice in my veins.

      “Oh, my God!” I gasped. “What is it? What does it mean?”

      Holmes had sprung to his feet, and I saw his dark, athletic
      outline at the door of the hut, his shoulders stooping, his head
      thrust forward, his face peering into the darkness.

      “Hush!” he whispered. “Hush!”

      The cry had been loud on account of its vehemence, but it had
      pealed out from somewhere far off on the shadowy plain. Now it
      burst upon our ears, nearer, louder, more urgent than before.

      “Where is it?” Holmes whispered; and I knew from the thrill of
      his voice that he, the man of iron, was shaken to the soul.
      “Where is it, Watson?”

      “There, I think.” I pointed into the darkness.

      “No, there!”

      Again the agonised cry swept through the silent night, louder and
      much nearer than ever. And a new sound mingled with it, a deep,
      muttered rumble, musical and yet menacing, rising and falling
      like the low, constant murmur of the sea.

      “The hound!” cried Holmes. “Come, Watson, come! Great heavens, if
      we are too late!”

      He had started running swiftly over the moor, and I had followed
      at his heels. But now from somewhere among the broken ground
      immediately in front of us there came one last despairing yell,
      and then a dull, heavy thud. We halted and listened. Not another
      sound broke the heavy silence of the windless night.

      I saw Holmes put his hand to his forehead like a man distracted.
      He stamped his feet upon the ground.

      “He has beaten us, Watson. We are too late.”

      “No, no, surely not!”

      “Fool that I was to hold my hand. And you, Watson, see what comes
      of abandoning your charge! But, by Heaven, if the worst has
      happened we’ll avenge him!”

      Blindly we ran through the gloom, blundering against boulders,
      forcing our way through gorse bushes, panting up hills and
      rushing down slopes, heading always in the direction whence those
      dreadful sounds had come. At every rise Holmes looked eagerly
      round him, but the shadows were thick upon the moor, and nothing
      moved upon its dreary face.

      “Can you see anything?”

      “Nothing.”

      “But, hark, what is that?”

      A low moan had fallen upon our ears. There it was again upon our
      left! On that side a ridge of rocks ended in a sheer cliff which
      overlooked a stone-strewn slope. On its jagged face was
      spread-eagled some dark, irregular object. As we ran towards it
      the vague outline hardened into a definite shape. It was a
      prostrate man face downward upon the ground, the head doubled
      under him at a horrible angle, the shoulders rounded and the body
      hunched together as if in the act of throwing a somersault. So
      grotesque was the attitude that I could not for the instant
      realise that that moan had been the passing of his soul. Not a
      whisper, not a rustle, rose now from the dark figure over which
      we stooped. Holmes laid his hand upon him and held it up again
      with an exclamation of horror. The gleam of the match which he
      struck shone upon his clotted fingers and upon the ghastly pool
      which widened slowly from the crushed skull of the victim. And it
      shone upon something else which turned our hearts sick and faint
      within us—the body of Sir Henry Baskerville!

      There was no chance of either of us forgetting that peculiar
      ruddy tweed suit—the very one which he had worn on the first
      morning that we had seen him in Baker Street. We caught the one
      clear glimpse of it, and then the match flickered and went out,
      even as the hope had gone out of our souls. Holmes groaned, and
      his face glimmered white through the darkness.

      “The brute! The brute!” I cried with clenched hands. “Oh Holmes,
      I shall never forgive myself for having left him to his fate.”

      “I am more to blame than you, Watson. In order to have my case
      well rounded and complete, I have thrown away the life of my
      client. It is the greatest blow which has befallen me in my
      career. But how could I know—how _could_ I know—that he would
      risk his life alone upon the moor in the face of all my
      warnings?”

      “That we should have heard his screams—my God, those screams!—and
      yet have been unable to save him! Where is this brute of a hound
      which drove him to his death? It may be lurking among these rocks
      at this instant. And Stapleton, where is he? He shall answer for
      this deed.”

      “He shall. I will see to that. Uncle and nephew have been
      murdered—the one frightened to death by the very sight of a beast
      which he thought to be supernatural, the other driven to his end
      in his wild flight to escape from it. But now we have to prove
      the connection between the man and the beast. Save from what we
      heard, we cannot even swear to the existence of the latter, since
      Sir Henry has evidently died from the fall. But, by heavens,
      cunning as he is, the fellow shall be in my power before another
      day is past!”

      We stood with bitter hearts on either side of the mangled body,
      overwhelmed by this sudden and irrevocable disaster which had
      brought all our long and weary labours to so piteous an end. Then
      as the moon rose we climbed to the top of the rocks over which
      our poor friend had fallen, and from the summit we gazed out over
      the shadowy moor, half silver and half gloom. Far away, miles
      off, in the direction of Grimpen, a single steady yellow light
      was shining. It could only come from the lonely abode of the
      Stapletons. With a bitter curse I shook my fist at it as I gazed.

      “Why should we not seize him at once?”

      “Our case is not complete. The fellow is wary and cunning to the
      last degree. It is not what we know, but what we can prove. If we
      make one false move the villain may escape us yet.”

      “What can we do?”

      “There will be plenty for us to do tomorrow. Tonight we can only
      perform the last offices to our poor friend.”

      Together we made our way down the precipitous slope and
      approached the body, black and clear against the silvered stones.
      The agony of those contorted limbs struck me with a spasm of pain
      and blurred my eyes with tears.

      “We must send for help, Holmes! We cannot carry him all the way
      to the Hall. Good heavens, are you mad?”

      He had uttered a cry and bent over the body. Now he was dancing
      and laughing and wringing my hand. Could this be my stern,
      self-contained friend? These were hidden fires, indeed!

      “A beard! A beard! The man has a beard!”

      “A beard?”

      “It is not the baronet—it is—why, it is my neighbour, the
      convict!”

      With feverish haste we had turned the body over, and that
      dripping beard was pointing up to the cold, clear moon. There
      could be no doubt about the beetling forehead, the sunken animal
      eyes. It was indeed the same face which had glared upon me in the
      light of the candle from over the rock—the face of Selden, the
      criminal.

      Then in an instant it was all clear to me. I remembered how the
      baronet had told me that he had handed his old wardrobe to
      Barrymore. Barrymore had passed it on in order to help Selden in
      his escape. Boots, shirt, cap—it was all Sir Henry’s. The tragedy
      was still black enough, but this man had at least deserved death
      by the laws of his country. I told Holmes how the matter stood,
      my heart bubbling over with thankfulness and joy.

      “Then the clothes have been the poor devil’s death,” said he. “It
      is clear enough that the hound has been laid on from some article
      of Sir Henry’s—the boot which was abstracted in the hotel, in all
      probability—and so ran this man down. There is one very singular
      thing, however: How came Selden, in the darkness, to know that
      the hound was on his trail?”

      “He heard him.”

      “To hear a hound upon the moor would not work a hard man like
      this convict into such a paroxysm of terror that he would risk
      recapture by screaming wildly for help. By his cries he must have
      run a long way after he knew the animal was on his track. How did
      he know?”

      “A greater mystery to me is why this hound, presuming that all
      our conjectures are correct—”

      “I presume nothing.”

      “Well, then, why this hound should be loose tonight. I suppose
      that it does not always run loose upon the moor. Stapleton would
      not let it go unless he had reason to think that Sir Henry would
      be there.”

      “My difficulty is the more formidable of the two, for I think
      that we shall very shortly get an explanation of yours, while
      mine may remain forever a mystery. The question now is, what
      shall we do with this poor wretch’s body? We cannot leave it here
      to the foxes and the ravens.”

      “I suggest that we put it in one of the huts until we can
      communicate with the police.”

      “Exactly. I have no doubt that you and I could carry it so far.
      Halloa, Watson, what’s this? It’s the man himself, by all that’s
      wonderful and audacious! Not a word to show your suspicions—not a
      word, or my plans crumble to the ground.”

      A figure was approaching us over the moor, and I saw the dull red
      glow of a cigar. The moon shone upon him, and I could distinguish
      the dapper shape and jaunty walk of the naturalist. He stopped
      when he saw us, and then came on again.

      “Why, Dr. Watson, that’s not you, is it? You are the last man
      that I should have expected to see out on the moor at this time
      of night. But, dear me, what’s this? Somebody hurt? Not—don’t
      tell me that it is our friend Sir Henry!” He hurried past me and
      stooped over the dead man. I heard a sharp intake of his breath
      and the cigar fell from his fingers.

      “Who—who’s this?” he stammered.

      “It is Selden, the man who escaped from Princetown.”

      Stapleton turned a ghastly face upon us, but by a supreme effort
      he had overcome his amazement and his disappointment. He looked
      sharply from Holmes to me. “Dear me! What a very shocking affair!
      How did he die?”

      “He appears to have broken his neck by falling over these rocks.
      My friend and I were strolling on the moor when we heard a cry.”

      “I heard a cry also. That was what brought me out. I was uneasy
      about Sir Henry.”

      “Why about Sir Henry in particular?” I could not help asking.

      “Because I had suggested that he should come over. When he did
      not come I was surprised, and I naturally became alarmed for his
      safety when I heard cries upon the moor. By the way”—his eyes
      darted again from my face to Holmes’s—“did you hear anything else
      besides a cry?”

      “No,” said Holmes; “did you?”

      “No.”

      “What do you mean, then?”

      “Oh, you know the stories that the peasants tell about a phantom
      hound, and so on. It is said to be heard at night upon the moor.
      I was wondering if there were any evidence of such a sound
      tonight.”

      “We heard nothing of the kind,” said I.

      “And what is your theory of this poor fellow’s death?”

      “I have no doubt that anxiety and exposure have driven him off
      his head. He has rushed about the moor in a crazy state and
      eventually fallen over here and broken his neck.”

      “That seems the most reasonable theory,” said Stapleton, and he
      gave a sigh which I took to indicate his relief. “What do you
      think about it, Mr. Sherlock Holmes?”

      My friend bowed his compliments. “You are quick at
      identification,” said he.

      “We have been expecting you in these parts since Dr. Watson came
      down. You are in time to see a tragedy.”

      “Yes, indeed. I have no doubt that my friend’s explanation will
      cover the facts. I will take an unpleasant remembrance back to
      London with me tomorrow.”

      “Oh, you return tomorrow?”

      “That is my intention.”

      “I hope your visit has cast some light upon those occurrences
      which have puzzled us?”

      Holmes shrugged his shoulders.

      “One cannot always have the success for which one hopes. An
      investigator needs facts and not legends or rumours. It has not
      been a satisfactory case.”

      My friend spoke in his frankest and most unconcerned manner.
      Stapleton still looked hard at him. Then he turned to me.

      “I would suggest carrying this poor fellow to my house, but it
      would give my sister such a fright that I do not feel justified
      in doing it. I think that if we put something over his face he
      will be safe until morning.”

      And so it was arranged. Resisting Stapleton’s offer of
      hospitality, Holmes and I set off to Baskerville Hall, leaving
      the naturalist to return alone. Looking back we saw the figure
      moving slowly away over the broad moor, and behind him that one
      black smudge on the silvered slope which showed where the man was
      lying who had come so horribly to his end.

      “We’re at close grips at last,” said Holmes as we walked together
      across the moor. “What a nerve the fellow has! How he pulled
      himself together in the face of what must have been a paralyzing
      shock when he found that the wrong man had fallen a victim to his
      plot. I told you in London, Watson, and I tell you now again,
      that we have never had a foeman more worthy of our steel.”

      “I am sorry that he has seen you.”

      “And so was I at first. But there was no getting out of it.”

      “What effect do you think it will have upon his plans now that he
      knows you are here?”

      “It may cause him to be more cautious, or it may drive him to
      desperate measures at once. Like most clever criminals, he may be
      too confident in his own cleverness and imagine that he has
      completely deceived us.”

      “Why should we not arrest him at once?”

      “My dear Watson, you were born to be a man of action. Your
      instinct is always to do something energetic. But supposing, for
      argument’s sake, that we had him arrested tonight, what on earth
      the better off should we be for that? We could prove nothing
      against him. There’s the devilish cunning of it! If he were
      acting through a human agent we could get some evidence, but if
      we were to drag this great dog to the light of day it would not
      help us in putting a rope round the neck of its master.”

      “Surely we have a case.”

      “Not a shadow of one—only surmise and conjecture. We should be
      laughed out of court if we came with such a story and such
      evidence.”

      “There is Sir Charles’s death.”

      “Found dead without a mark upon him. You and I know that he died
      of sheer fright, and we know also what frightened him, but how
      are we to get twelve stolid jurymen to know it? What signs are
      there of a hound? Where are the marks of its fangs? Of course we
      know that a hound does not bite a dead body and that Sir Charles
      was dead before ever the brute overtook him. But we have to prove
      all this, and we are not in a position to do it.”

      “Well, then, tonight?”

      “We are not much better off tonight. Again, there was no direct
      connection between the hound and the man’s death. We never saw
      the hound. We heard it, but we could not prove that it was
      running upon this man’s trail. There is a complete absence of
      motive. No, my dear fellow; we must reconcile ourselves to the
      fact that we have no case at present, and that it is worth our
      while to run any risk in order to establish one.”

      “And how do you propose to do so?”

      “I have great hopes of what Mrs. Laura Lyons may do for us when
      the position of affairs is made clear to her. And I have my own
      plan as well. Sufficient for tomorrow is the evil thereof; but I
      hope before the day is past to have the upper hand at last.”

      I could draw nothing further from him, and he walked, lost in
      thought, as far as the Baskerville gates.

      “Are you coming up?”

      “Yes; I see no reason for further concealment. But one last word,
      Watson. Say nothing of the hound to Sir Henry. Let him think that
      Selden’s death was as Stapleton would have us believe. He will
      have a better nerve for the ordeal which he will have to undergo
      tomorrow, when he is engaged, if I remember your report aright,
      to dine with these people.”

      “And so am I.”

      “Then you must excuse yourself and he must go alone. That will be
      easily arranged. And now, if we are too late for dinner, I think
      that we are both ready for our suppers.”




Chapter 13.
Fixing the Nets


      Sir Henry was more pleased than surprised to see Sherlock Holmes,
      for he had for some days been expecting that recent events would
      bring him down from London. He did raise his eyebrows, however,
      when he found that my friend had neither any luggage nor any
      explanations for its absence. Between us we soon supplied his
      wants, and then over a belated supper we explained to the baronet
      as much of our experience as it seemed desirable that he should
      know. But first I had the unpleasant duty of breaking the news to
      Barrymore and his wife. To him it may have been an unmitigated
      relief, but she wept bitterly in her apron. To all the world he
      was the man of violence, half animal and half demon; but to her
      he always remained the little wilful boy of her own girlhood, the
      child who had clung to her hand. Evil indeed is the man who has
      not one woman to mourn him.

      “I’ve been moping in the house all day since Watson went off in
      the morning,” said the baronet. “I guess I should have some
      credit, for I have kept my promise. If I hadn’t sworn not to go
      about alone I might have had a more lively evening, for I had a
      message from Stapleton asking me over there.”

      “I have no doubt that you would have had a more lively evening,”
      said Holmes drily. “By the way, I don’t suppose you appreciate
      that we have been mourning over you as having broken your neck?”

      Sir Henry opened his eyes. “How was that?”

      “This poor wretch was dressed in your clothes. I fear your
      servant who gave them to him may get into trouble with the
      police.”

      “That is unlikely. There was no mark on any of them, as far as I
      know.”

      “That’s lucky for him—in fact, it’s lucky for all of you, since
      you are all on the wrong side of the law in this matter. I am not
      sure that as a conscientious detective my first duty is not to
      arrest the whole household. Watson’s reports are most
      incriminating documents.”

      “But how about the case?” asked the baronet. “Have you made
      anything out of the tangle? I don’t know that Watson and I are
      much the wiser since we came down.”

      “I think that I shall be in a position to make the situation
      rather more clear to you before long. It has been an exceedingly
      difficult and most complicated business. There are several points
      upon which we still want light—but it is coming all the same.”

      “We’ve had one experience, as Watson has no doubt told you. We
      heard the hound on the moor, so I can swear that it is not all
      empty superstition. I had something to do with dogs when I was
      out West, and I know one when I hear one. If you can muzzle that
      one and put him on a chain I’ll be ready to swear you are the
      greatest detective of all time.”

      “I think I will muzzle him and chain him all right if you will
      give me your help.”

      “Whatever you tell me to do I will do.”

      “Very good; and I will ask you also to do it blindly, without
      always asking the reason.”

      “Just as you like.”

      “If you will do this I think the chances are that our little
      problem will soon be solved. I have no doubt—”

      He stopped suddenly and stared fixedly up over my head into the
      air. The lamp beat upon his face, and so intent was it and so
      still that it might have been that of a clear-cut classical
      statue, a personification of alertness and expectation.

      “What is it?” we both cried.

      I could see as he looked down that he was repressing some
      internal emotion. His features were still composed, but his eyes
      shone with amused exultation.

      “Excuse the admiration of a connoisseur,” said he as he waved his
      hand towards the line of portraits which covered the opposite
      wall. “Watson won’t allow that I know anything of art but that is
      mere jealousy because our views upon the subject differ. Now,
      these are a really very fine series of portraits.”

      “Well, I’m glad to hear you say so,” said Sir Henry, glancing
      with some surprise at my friend. “I don’t pretend to know much
      about these things, and I’d be a better judge of a horse or a
      steer than of a picture. I didn’t know that you found time for
      such things.”

      “I know what is good when I see it, and I see it now. That’s a
      Kneller, I’ll swear, that lady in the blue silk over yonder, and
      the stout gentleman with the wig ought to be a Reynolds. They are
      all family portraits, I presume?”

      “Every one.”

      “Do you know the names?”

      “Barrymore has been coaching me in them, and I think I can say my
      lessons fairly well.”

      “Who is the gentleman with the telescope?”

      “That is Rear-Admiral Baskerville, who served under Rodney in the
      West Indies. The man with the blue coat and the roll of paper is
      Sir William Baskerville, who was Chairman of Committees of the
      House of Commons under Pitt.”

      “And this Cavalier opposite to me—the one with the black velvet
      and the lace?”

      “Ah, you have a right to know about him. That is the cause of all
      the mischief, the wicked Hugo, who started the Hound of the
      Baskervilles. We’re not likely to forget him.”

      I gazed with interest and some surprise upon the portrait.

      “Dear me!” said Holmes, “he seems a quiet, meek-mannered man
      enough, but I dare say that there was a lurking devil in his
      eyes. I had pictured him as a more robust and ruffianly person.”

      “There’s no doubt about the authenticity, for the name and the
      date, 1647, are on the back of the canvas.”

      Holmes said little more, but the picture of the old roysterer
      seemed to have a fascination for him, and his eyes were
      continually fixed upon it during supper. It was not until later,
      when Sir Henry had gone to his room, that I was able to follow
      the trend of his thoughts. He led me back into the
      banqueting-hall, his bedroom candle in his hand, and he held it
      up against the time-stained portrait on the wall.

      “Do you see anything there?”

      I looked at the broad plumed hat, the curling love-locks, the
      white lace collar, and the straight, severe face which was framed
      between them. It was not a brutal countenance, but it was prim,
      hard, and stern, with a firm-set, thin-lipped mouth, and a coldly
      intolerant eye.

      “Is it like anyone you know?”

      “There is something of Sir Henry about the jaw.”

      “Just a suggestion, perhaps. But wait an instant!” He stood upon
      a chair, and, holding up the light in his left hand, he curved
      his right arm over the broad hat and round the long ringlets.

      “Good heavens!” I cried in amazement.

      The face of Stapleton had sprung out of the canvas.

      “Ha, you see it now. My eyes have been trained to examine faces
      and not their trimmings. It is the first quality of a criminal
      investigator that he should see through a disguise.”

      “But this is marvellous. It might be his portrait.”

      “Yes, it is an interesting instance of a throwback, which appears
      to be both physical and spiritual. A study of family portraits is
      enough to convert a man to the doctrine of reincarnation. The
      fellow is a Baskerville—that is evident.”

      “With designs upon the succession.”

      “Exactly. This chance of the picture has supplied us with one of
      our most obvious missing links. We have him, Watson, we have him,
      and I dare swear that before tomorrow night he will be fluttering
      in our net as helpless as one of his own butterflies. A pin, a
      cork, and a card, and we add him to the Baker Street collection!”
      He burst into one of his rare fits of laughter as he turned away
      from the picture. I have not heard him laugh often, and it has
      always boded ill to somebody.

      I was up betimes in the morning, but Holmes was afoot earlier
      still, for I saw him as I dressed, coming up the drive.

      “Yes, we should have a full day today,” he remarked, and he
      rubbed his hands with the joy of action. “The nets are all in
      place, and the drag is about to begin. We’ll know before the day
      is out whether we have caught our big, lean-jawed pike, or
      whether he has got through the meshes.”

      “Have you been on the moor already?”

      “I have sent a report from Grimpen to Princetown as to the death
      of Selden. I think I can promise that none of you will be
      troubled in the matter. And I have also communicated with my
      faithful Cartwright, who would certainly have pined away at the
      door of my hut, as a dog does at his master’s grave, if I had not
      set his mind at rest about my safety.”

      “What is the next move?”

      “To see Sir Henry. Ah, here he is!”

      “Good-morning, Holmes,” said the baronet. “You look like a
      general who is planning a battle with his chief of the staff.”

      “That is the exact situation. Watson was asking for orders.”

      “And so do I.”

      “Very good. You are engaged, as I understand, to dine with our
      friends the Stapletons tonight.”

      “I hope that you will come also. They are very hospitable people,
      and I am sure that they would be very glad to see you.”

      “I fear that Watson and I must go to London.”

      “To London?”

      “Yes, I think that we should be more useful there at the present
      juncture.”

      The baronet’s face perceptibly lengthened.

      “I hoped that you were going to see me through this business. The
      Hall and the moor are not very pleasant places when one is
      alone.”

      “My dear fellow, you must trust me implicitly and do exactly what
      I tell you. You can tell your friends that we should have been
      happy to have come with you, but that urgent business required us
      to be in town. We hope very soon to return to Devonshire. Will
      you remember to give them that message?”

      “If you insist upon it.”

      “There is no alternative, I assure you.”

      I saw by the baronet’s clouded brow that he was deeply hurt by
      what he regarded as our desertion.

      “When do you desire to go?” he asked coldly.

      “Immediately after breakfast. We will drive in to Coombe Tracey,
      but Watson will leave his things as a pledge that he will come
      back to you. Watson, you will send a note to Stapleton to tell
      him that you regret that you cannot come.”

      “I have a good mind to go to London with you,” said the baronet.
      “Why should I stay here alone?”

      “Because it is your post of duty. Because you gave me your word
      that you would do as you were told, and I tell you to stay.”

      “All right, then, I’ll stay.”

      “One more direction! I wish you to drive to Merripit House. Send
      back your trap, however, and let them know that you intend to
      walk home.”

      “To walk across the moor?”

      “Yes.”

      “But that is the very thing which you have so often cautioned me
      not to do.”

      “This time you may do it with safety. If I had not every
      confidence in your nerve and courage I would not suggest it, but
      it is essential that you should do it.”

      “Then I will do it.”

      “And as you value your life do not go across the moor in any
      direction save along the straight path which leads from Merripit
      House to the Grimpen Road, and is your natural way home.”

      “I will do just what you say.”

      “Very good. I should be glad to get away as soon after breakfast
      as possible, so as to reach London in the afternoon.”

      I was much astounded by this programme, though I remembered that
      Holmes had said to Stapleton on the night before that his visit
      would terminate next day. It had not crossed my mind however,
      that he would wish me to go with him, nor could I understand how
      we could both be absent at a moment which he himself declared to
      be critical. There was nothing for it, however, but implicit
      obedience; so we bade good-bye to our rueful friend, and a couple
      of hours afterwards we were at the station of Coombe Tracey and
      had dispatched the trap upon its return journey. A small boy was
      waiting upon the platform.

      “Any orders, sir?”

      “You will take this train to town, Cartwright. The moment you
      arrive you will send a wire to Sir Henry Baskerville, in my name,
      to say that if he finds the pocketbook which I have dropped he is
      to send it by registered post to Baker Street.”

      “Yes, sir.”

      “And ask at the station office if there is a message for me.”

      The boy returned with a telegram, which Holmes handed to me. It
      ran:

      Wire received. Coming down with unsigned warrant. Arrive
      five-forty. Lestrade.

      “That is in answer to mine of this morning. He is the best of the
      professionals, I think, and we may need his assistance. Now,
      Watson, I think that we cannot employ our time better than by
      calling upon your acquaintance, Mrs. Laura Lyons.”

      His plan of campaign was beginning to be evident. He would use
      the baronet in order to convince the Stapletons that we were
      really gone, while we should actually return at the instant when
      we were likely to be needed. That telegram from London, if
      mentioned by Sir Henry to the Stapletons, must remove the last
      suspicions from their minds. Already I seemed to see our nets
      drawing closer around that lean-jawed pike.

      Mrs. Laura Lyons was in her office, and Sherlock Holmes opened
      his interview with a frankness and directness which considerably
      amazed her.

      “I am investigating the circumstances which attended the death of
      the late Sir Charles Baskerville,” said he. “My friend here, Dr.
      Watson, has informed me of what you have communicated, and also
      of what you have withheld in connection with that matter.”

      “What have I withheld?” she asked defiantly.

      “You have confessed that you asked Sir Charles to be at the gate
      at ten o’clock. We know that that was the place and hour of his
      death. You have withheld what the connection is between these
      events.”

      “There is no connection.”

      “In that case the coincidence must indeed be an extraordinary
      one. But I think that we shall succeed in establishing a
      connection, after all. I wish to be perfectly frank with you,
      Mrs. Lyons. We regard this case as one of murder, and the
      evidence may implicate not only your friend Mr. Stapleton but his
      wife as well.”

      The lady sprang from her chair.

      “His wife!” she cried.

      “The fact is no longer a secret. The person who has passed for
      his sister is really his wife.”

      Mrs. Lyons had resumed her seat. Her hands were grasping the arms
      of her chair, and I saw that the pink nails had turned white with
      the pressure of her grip.

      “His wife!” she said again. “His wife! He is not a married man.”

      Sherlock Holmes shrugged his shoulders.

      “Prove it to me! Prove it to me! And if you can do so—!”

      The fierce flash of her eyes said more than any words.

      “I have come prepared to do so,” said Holmes, drawing several
      papers from his pocket. “Here is a photograph of the couple taken
      in York four years ago. It is indorsed ‘Mr. and Mrs. Vandeleur,’
      but you will have no difficulty in recognizing him, and her also,
      if you know her by sight. Here are three written descriptions by
      trustworthy witnesses of Mr. and Mrs. Vandeleur, who at that time
      kept St. Oliver’s private school. Read them and see if you can
      doubt the identity of these people.”

      She glanced at them, and then looked up at us with the set, rigid
      face of a desperate woman.

      “Mr. Holmes,” she said, “this man had offered me marriage on
      condition that I could get a divorce from my husband. He has lied
      to me, the villain, in every conceivable way. Not one word of
      truth has he ever told me. And why—why? I imagined that all was
      for my own sake. But now I see that I was never anything but a
      tool in his hands. Why should I preserve faith with him who never
      kept any with me? Why should I try to shield him from the
      consequences of his own wicked acts? Ask me what you like, and
      there is nothing which I shall hold back. One thing I swear to
      you, and that is that when I wrote the letter I never dreamed of
      any harm to the old gentleman, who had been my kindest friend.”

      “I entirely believe you, madam,” said Sherlock Holmes. “The
      recital of these events must be very painful to you, and perhaps
      it will make it easier if I tell you what occurred, and you can
      check me if I make any material mistake. The sending of this
      letter was suggested to you by Stapleton?”

      “He dictated it.”

      “I presume that the reason he gave was that you would receive
      help from Sir Charles for the legal expenses connected with your
      divorce?”

      “Exactly.”

      “And then after you had sent the letter he dissuaded you from
      keeping the appointment?”

      “He told me that it would hurt his self-respect that any other
      man should find the money for such an object, and that though he
      was a poor man himself he would devote his last penny to removing
      the obstacles which divided us.”

      “He appears to be a very consistent character. And then you heard
      nothing until you read the reports of the death in the paper?”

      “No.”

      “And he made you swear to say nothing about your appointment with
      Sir Charles?”

      “He did. He said that the death was a very mysterious one, and
      that I should certainly be suspected if the facts came out. He
      frightened me into remaining silent.”

      “Quite so. But you had your suspicions?”

      She hesitated and looked down.

      “I knew him,” she said. “But if he had kept faith with me I
      should always have done so with him.”

      “I think that on the whole you have had a fortunate escape,” said
      Sherlock Holmes. “You have had him in your power and he knew it,
      and yet you are alive. You have been walking for some months very
      near to the edge of a precipice. We must wish you good-morning
      now, Mrs. Lyons, and it is probable that you will very shortly
      hear from us again.”

      “Our case becomes rounded off, and difficulty after difficulty
      thins away in front of us,” said Holmes as we stood waiting for
      the arrival of the express from town. “I shall soon be in the
      position of being able to put into a single connected narrative
      one of the most singular and sensational crimes of modern times.
      Students of criminology will remember the analogous incidents in
      Godno, in Little Russia, in the year ’66, and of course there are
      the Anderson murders in North Carolina, but this case possesses
      some features which are entirely its own. Even now we have no
      clear case against this very wily man. But I shall be very much
      surprised if it is not clear enough before we go to bed this
      night.”

      The London express came roaring into the station, and a small,
      wiry bulldog of a man had sprung from a first-class carriage. We
      all three shook hands, and I saw at once from the reverential way
      in which Lestrade gazed at my companion that he had learned a
      good deal since the days when they had first worked together. I
      could well remember the scorn which the theories of the reasoner
      used then to excite in the practical man.

      “Anything good?” he asked.

      “The biggest thing for years,” said Holmes. “We have two hours
      before we need think of starting. I think we might employ it in
      getting some dinner and then, Lestrade, we will take the London
      fog out of your throat by giving you a breath of the pure night
      air of Dartmoor. Never been there? Ah, well, I don’t suppose you
      will forget your first visit.”




Chapter 14.
The Hound of the Baskervilles


      One of Sherlock Holmes’s defects—if, indeed, one may call it a
      defect—was that he was exceedingly loath to communicate his full
      plans to any other person until the instant of their fulfilment.
      Partly it came no doubt from his own masterful nature, which
      loved to dominate and surprise those who were around him. Partly
      also from his professional caution, which urged him never to take
      any chances. The result, however, was very trying for those who
      were acting as his agents and assistants. I had often suffered
      under it, but never more so than during that long drive in the
      darkness. The great ordeal was in front of us; at last we were
      about to make our final effort, and yet Holmes had said nothing,
      and I could only surmise what his course of action would be. My
      nerves thrilled with anticipation when at last the cold wind upon
      our faces and the dark, void spaces on either side of the narrow
      road told me that we were back upon the moor once again. Every
      stride of the horses and every turn of the wheels was taking us
      nearer to our supreme adventure.

      Our conversation was hampered by the presence of the driver of
      the hired wagonette, so that we were forced to talk of trivial
      matters when our nerves were tense with emotion and anticipation.
      It was a relief to me, after that unnatural restraint, when we at
      last passed Frankland’s house and knew that we were drawing near
      to the Hall and to the scene of action. We did not drive up to
      the door but got down near the gate of the avenue. The wagonette
      was paid off and ordered to return to Coombe Tracey forthwith,
      while we started to walk to Merripit House.

      “Are you armed, Lestrade?”

      The little detective smiled. “As long as I have my trousers I
      have a hip-pocket, and as long as I have my hip-pocket I have
      something in it.”

      “Good! My friend and I are also ready for emergencies.”

      “You’re mighty close about this affair, Mr. Holmes. What’s the
      game now?”

      “A waiting game.”

      “My word, it does not seem a very cheerful place,” said the
      detective with a shiver, glancing round him at the gloomy slopes
      of the hill and at the huge lake of fog which lay over the
      Grimpen Mire. “I see the lights of a house ahead of us.”

      “That is Merripit House and the end of our journey. I must
      request you to walk on tiptoe and not to talk above a whisper.”

      We moved cautiously along the track as if we were bound for the
      house, but Holmes halted us when we were about two hundred yards
      from it.

      “This will do,” said he. “These rocks upon the right make an
      admirable screen.”

      “We are to wait here?”

      “Yes, we shall make our little ambush here. Get into this hollow,
      Lestrade. You have been inside the house, have you not, Watson?
      Can you tell the position of the rooms? What are those latticed
      windows at this end?”

      “I think they are the kitchen windows.”

      “And the one beyond, which shines so brightly?”

      “That is certainly the dining-room.”

      “The blinds are up. You know the lie of the land best. Creep
      forward quietly and see what they are doing—but for heaven’s sake
      don’t let them know that they are watched!”

      I tiptoed down the path and stooped behind the low wall which
      surrounded the stunted orchard. Creeping in its shadow I reached
      a point whence I could look straight through the uncurtained
      window.

      There were only two men in the room, Sir Henry and Stapleton.
      They sat with their profiles towards me on either side of the
      round table. Both of them were smoking cigars, and coffee and
      wine were in front of them. Stapleton was talking with animation,
      but the baronet looked pale and distrait. Perhaps the thought of
      that lonely walk across the ill-omened moor was weighing heavily
      upon his mind.

      As I watched them Stapleton rose and left the room, while Sir
      Henry filled his glass again and leaned back in his chair,
      puffing at his cigar. I heard the creak of a door and the crisp
      sound of boots upon gravel. The steps passed along the path on
      the other side of the wall under which I crouched. Looking over,
      I saw the naturalist pause at the door of an out-house in the
      corner of the orchard. A key turned in a lock, and as he passed
      in there was a curious scuffling noise from within. He was only a
      minute or so inside, and then I heard the key turn once more and
      he passed me and reentered the house. I saw him rejoin his guest,
      and I crept quietly back to where my companions were waiting to
      tell them what I had seen.

      “You say, Watson, that the lady is not there?” Holmes asked when
      I had finished my report.

      “No.”

      “Where can she be, then, since there is no light in any other
      room except the kitchen?”

      “I cannot think where she is.”

      I have said that over the great Grimpen Mire there hung a dense,
      white fog. It was drifting slowly in our direction and banked
      itself up like a wall on that side of us, low but thick and well
      defined. The moon shone on it, and it looked like a great
      shimmering ice-field, with the heads of the distant tors as rocks
      borne upon its surface. Holmes’s face was turned towards it, and
      he muttered impatiently as he watched its sluggish drift.

      “It’s moving towards us, Watson.”

      “Is that serious?”

      “Very serious, indeed—the one thing upon earth which could have
      disarranged my plans. He can’t be very long, now. It is already
      ten o’clock. Our success and even his life may depend upon his
      coming out before the fog is over the path.”

      The night was clear and fine above us. The stars shone cold and
      bright, while a half-moon bathed the whole scene in a soft,
      uncertain light. Before us lay the dark bulk of the house, its
      serrated roof and bristling chimneys hard outlined against the
      silver-spangled sky. Broad bars of golden light from the lower
      windows stretched across the orchard and the moor. One of them
      was suddenly shut off. The servants had left the kitchen. There
      only remained the lamp in the dining-room where the two men, the
      murderous host and the unconscious guest, still chatted over
      their cigars.

      Every minute that white woolly plain which covered one-half of
      the moor was drifting closer and closer to the house. Already the
      first thin wisps of it were curling across the golden square of
      the lighted window. The farther wall of the orchard was already
      invisible, and the trees were standing out of a swirl of white
      vapour. As we watched it the fog-wreaths came crawling round both
      corners of the house and rolled slowly into one dense bank on
      which the upper floor and the roof floated like a strange ship
      upon a shadowy sea. Holmes struck his hand passionately upon the
      rock in front of us and stamped his feet in his impatience.

      “If he isn’t out in a quarter of an hour the path will be
      covered. In half an hour we won’t be able to see our hands in
      front of us.”

      “Shall we move farther back upon higher ground?”

      “Yes, I think it would be as well.”

      So as the fog-bank flowed onward we fell back before it until we
      were half a mile from the house, and still that dense white sea,
      with the moon silvering its upper edge, swept slowly and
      inexorably on.

      “We are going too far,” said Holmes. “We dare not take the chance
      of his being overtaken before he can reach us. At all costs we
      must hold our ground where we are.” He dropped on his knees and
      clapped his ear to the ground. “Thank God, I think that I hear
      him coming.”

      A sound of quick steps broke the silence of the moor. Crouching
      among the stones we stared intently at the silver-tipped bank in
      front of us. The steps grew louder, and through the fog, as
      through a curtain, there stepped the man whom we were awaiting.
      He looked round him in surprise as he emerged into the clear,
      starlit night. Then he came swiftly along the path, passed close
      to where we lay, and went on up the long slope behind us. As he
      walked he glanced continually over either shoulder, like a man
      who is ill at ease.

      “Hist!” cried Holmes, and I heard the sharp click of a cocking
      pistol. “Look out! It’s coming!”

      There was a thin, crisp, continuous patter from somewhere in the
      heart of that crawling bank. The cloud was within fifty yards of
      where we lay, and we glared at it, all three, uncertain what
      horror was about to break from the heart of it. I was at Holmes’s
      elbow, and I glanced for an instant at his face. It was pale and
      exultant, his eyes shining brightly in the moonlight. But
      suddenly they started forward in a rigid, fixed stare, and his
      lips parted in amazement. At the same instant Lestrade gave a
      yell of terror and threw himself face downward upon the ground. I
      sprang to my feet, my inert hand grasping my pistol, my mind
      paralyzed by the dreadful shape which had sprung out upon us from
      the shadows of the fog. A hound it was, an enormous coal-black
      hound, but not such a hound as mortal eyes have ever seen. Fire
      burst from its open mouth, its eyes glowed with a smouldering
      glare, its muzzle and hackles and dewlap were outlined in
      flickering flame. Never in the delirious dream of a disordered
      brain could anything more savage, more appalling, more hellish be
      conceived than that dark form and savage face which broke upon us
      out of the wall of fog.

      With long bounds the huge black creature was leaping down the
      track, following hard upon the footsteps of our friend. So
      paralyzed were we by the apparition that we allowed him to pass
      before we had recovered our nerve. Then Holmes and I both fired
      together, and the creature gave a hideous howl, which showed that
      one at least had hit him. He did not pause, however, but bounded
      onward. Far away on the path we saw Sir Henry looking back, his
      face white in the moonlight, his hands raised in horror, glaring
      helplessly at the frightful thing which was hunting him down. But
      that cry of pain from the hound had blown all our fears to the
      winds. If he was vulnerable he was mortal, and if we could wound
      him we could kill him. Never have I seen a man run as Holmes ran
      that night. I am reckoned fleet of foot, but he outpaced me as
      much as I outpaced the little professional. In front of us as we
      flew up the track we heard scream after scream from Sir Henry and
      the deep roar of the hound. I was in time to see the beast spring
      upon its victim, hurl him to the ground, and worry at his throat.
      But the next instant Holmes had emptied five barrels of his
      revolver into the creature’s flank. With a last howl of agony and
      a vicious snap in the air, it rolled upon its back, four feet
      pawing furiously, and then fell limp upon its side. I stooped,
      panting, and pressed my pistol to the dreadful, shimmering head,
      but it was useless to press the trigger. The giant hound was
      dead.

      Sir Henry lay insensible where he had fallen. We tore away his
      collar, and Holmes breathed a prayer of gratitude when we saw
      that there was no sign of a wound and that the rescue had been in
      time. Already our friend’s eyelids shivered and he made a feeble
      effort to move. Lestrade thrust his brandy-flask between the
      baronet’s teeth, and two frightened eyes were looking up at us.

      “My God!” he whispered. “What was it? What, in heaven’s name, was
      it?”

      “It’s dead, whatever it is,” said Holmes. “We’ve laid the family
      ghost once and forever.”

      In mere size and strength it was a terrible creature which was
      lying stretched before us. It was not a pure bloodhound and it
      was not a pure mastiff; but it appeared to be a combination of
      the two—gaunt, savage, and as large as a small lioness. Even now
      in the stillness of death, the huge jaws seemed to be dripping
      with a bluish flame and the small, deep-set, cruel eyes were
      ringed with fire. I placed my hand upon the glowing muzzle, and
      as I held them up my own fingers smouldered and gleamed in the
      darkness.

      “Phosphorus,” I said.

      “A cunning preparation of it,” said Holmes, sniffing at the dead
      animal. “There is no smell which might have interfered with his
      power of scent. We owe you a deep apology, Sir Henry, for having
      exposed you to this fright. I was prepared for a hound, but not
      for such a creature as this. And the fog gave us little time to
      receive him.”

      “You have saved my life.”

      “Having first endangered it. Are you strong enough to stand?”

      “Give me another mouthful of that brandy and I shall be ready for
      anything. So! Now, if you will help me up. What do you propose to
      do?”

      “To leave you here. You are not fit for further adventures
      tonight. If you will wait, one or other of us will go back with
      you to the Hall.”

      He tried to stagger to his feet; but he was still ghastly pale
      and trembling in every limb. We helped him to a rock, where he
      sat shivering with his face buried in his hands.

      “We must leave you now,” said Holmes. “The rest of our work must
      be done, and every moment is of importance. We have our case, and
      now we only want our man.

      “It’s a thousand to one against our finding him at the house,” he
      continued as we retraced our steps swiftly down the path. “Those
      shots must have told him that the game was up.”

      “We were some distance off, and this fog may have deadened them.”

      “He followed the hound to call him off—of that you may be
      certain. No, no, he’s gone by this time! But we’ll search the
      house and make sure.”

      The front door was open, so we rushed in and hurried from room to
      room to the amazement of a doddering old manservant, who met us
      in the passage. There was no light save in the dining-room, but
      Holmes caught up the lamp and left no corner of the house
      unexplored. No sign could we see of the man whom we were chasing.
      On the upper floor, however, one of the bedroom doors was locked.

      “There’s someone in here,” cried Lestrade. “I can hear a
      movement. Open this door!”

      A faint moaning and rustling came from within. Holmes struck the
      door just over the lock with the flat of his foot and it flew
      open. Pistol in hand, we all three rushed into the room.

      But there was no sign within it of that desperate and defiant
      villain whom we expected to see. Instead we were faced by an
      object so strange and so unexpected that we stood for a moment
      staring at it in amazement.

      The room had been fashioned into a small museum, and the walls
      were lined by a number of glass-topped cases full of that
      collection of butterflies and moths the formation of which had
      been the relaxation of this complex and dangerous man. In the
      centre of this room there was an upright beam, which had been
      placed at some period as a support for the old worm-eaten baulk
      of timber which spanned the roof. To this post a figure was tied,
      so swathed and muffled in the sheets which had been used to
      secure it that one could not for the moment tell whether it was
      that of a man or a woman. One towel passed round the throat and
      was secured at the back of the pillar. Another covered the lower
      part of the face, and over it two dark eyes—eyes full of grief
      and shame and a dreadful questioning—stared back at us. In a
      minute we had torn off the gag, unswathed the bonds, and Mrs.
      Stapleton sank upon the floor in front of us. As her beautiful
      head fell upon her chest I saw the clear red weal of a whiplash
      across her neck.

      “The brute!” cried Holmes. “Here, Lestrade, your brandy-bottle!
      Put her in the chair! She has fainted from ill-usage and
      exhaustion.”

      She opened her eyes again.

      “Is he safe?” she asked. “Has he escaped?”

      “He cannot escape us, madam.”

      “No, no, I did not mean my husband. Sir Henry? Is he safe?”

      “Yes.”

      “And the hound?”

      “It is dead.”

      She gave a long sigh of satisfaction.

      “Thank God! Thank God! Oh, this villain! See how he has treated
      me!” She shot her arms out from her sleeves, and we saw with
      horror that they were all mottled with bruises. “But this is
      nothing—nothing! It is my mind and soul that he has tortured and
      defiled. I could endure it all, ill-usage, solitude, a life of
      deception, everything, as long as I could still cling to the hope
      that I had his love, but now I know that in this also I have been
      his dupe and his tool.” She broke into passionate sobbing as she
      spoke.

      “You bear him no good will, madam,” said Holmes. “Tell us then
      where we shall find him. If you have ever aided him in evil, help
      us now and so atone.”

      “There is but one place where he can have fled,” she answered.
      “There is an old tin mine on an island in the heart of the mire.
      It was there that he kept his hound and there also he had made
      preparations so that he might have a refuge. That is where he
      would fly.”

      The fog-bank lay like white wool against the window. Holmes held
      the lamp towards it.

      “See,” said he. “No one could find his way into the Grimpen Mire
      tonight.”

      She laughed and clapped her hands. Her eyes and teeth gleamed
      with fierce merriment.

      “He may find his way in, but never out,” she cried. “How can he
      see the guiding wands tonight? We planted them together, he and
      I, to mark the pathway through the mire. Oh, if I could only have
      plucked them out today. Then indeed you would have had him at
      your mercy!”

      It was evident to us that all pursuit was in vain until the fog
      had lifted. Meanwhile we left Lestrade in possession of the house
      while Holmes and I went back with the baronet to Baskerville
      Hall. The story of the Stapletons could no longer be withheld
      from him, but he took the blow bravely when he learned the truth
      about the woman whom he had loved. But the shock of the night’s
      adventures had shattered his nerves, and before morning he lay
      delirious in a high fever under the care of Dr. Mortimer. The two
      of them were destined to travel together round the world before
      Sir Henry had become once more the hale, hearty man that he had
      been before he became master of that ill-omened estate.

      And now I come rapidly to the conclusion of this singular
      narrative, in which I have tried to make the reader share those
      dark fears and vague surmises which clouded our lives so long and
      ended in so tragic a manner. On the morning after the death of
      the hound the fog had lifted and we were guided by Mrs. Stapleton
      to the point where they had found a pathway through the bog. It
      helped us to realise the horror of this woman’s life when we saw
      the eagerness and joy with which she laid us on her husband’s
      track. We left her standing upon the thin peninsula of firm,
      peaty soil which tapered out into the widespread bog. From the
      end of it a small wand planted here and there showed where the
      path zigzagged from tuft to tuft of rushes among those
      green-scummed pits and foul quagmires which barred the way to the
      stranger. Rank reeds and lush, slimy water-plants sent an odour
      of decay and a heavy miasmatic vapour onto our faces, while a
      false step plunged us more than once thigh-deep into the dark,
      quivering mire, which shook for yards in soft undulations around
      our feet. Its tenacious grip plucked at our heels as we walked,
      and when we sank into it it was as if some malignant hand was
      tugging us down into those obscene depths, so grim and purposeful
      was the clutch in which it held us. Once only we saw a trace that
      someone had passed that perilous way before us. From amid a tuft
      of cotton grass which bore it up out of the slime some dark thing
      was projecting. Holmes sank to his waist as he stepped from the
      path to seize it, and had we not been there to drag him out he
      could never have set his foot upon firm land again. He held an
      old black boot in the air. “Meyers, Toronto,” was printed on the
      leather inside.

      “It is worth a mud bath,” said he. “It is our friend Sir Henry’s
      missing boot.”

      “Thrown there by Stapleton in his flight.”

      “Exactly. He retained it in his hand after using it to set the
      hound upon the track. He fled when he knew the game was up, still
      clutching it. And he hurled it away at this point of his flight.
      We know at least that he came so far in safety.”

      But more than that we were never destined to know, though there
      was much which we might surmise. There was no chance of finding
      footsteps in the mire, for the rising mud oozed swiftly in upon
      them, but as we at last reached firmer ground beyond the morass
      we all looked eagerly for them. But no slightest sign of them
      ever met our eyes. If the earth told a true story, then Stapleton
      never reached that island of refuge towards which he struggled
      through the fog upon that last night. Somewhere in the heart of
      the great Grimpen Mire, down in the foul slime of the huge morass
      which had sucked him in, this cold and cruel-hearted man is
      forever buried.

      Many traces we found of him in the bog-girt island where he had
      hid his savage ally. A huge driving-wheel and a shaft half-filled
      with rubbish showed the position of an abandoned mine. Beside it
      were the crumbling remains of the cottages of the miners, driven
      away no doubt by the foul reek of the surrounding swamp. In one
      of these a staple and chain with a quantity of gnawed bones
      showed where the animal had been confined. A skeleton with a
      tangle of brown hair adhering to it lay among the _débris_.

      “A dog!” said Holmes. “By Jove, a curly-haired spaniel. Poor
      Mortimer will never see his pet again. Well, I do not know that
      this place contains any secret which we have not already
      fathomed. He could hide his hound, but he could not hush its
      voice, and hence came those cries which even in daylight were not
      pleasant to hear. On an emergency he could keep the hound in the
      out-house at Merripit, but it was always a risk, and it was only
      on the supreme day, which he regarded as the end of all his
      efforts, that he dared do it. This paste in the tin is no doubt
      the luminous mixture with which the creature was daubed. It was
      suggested, of course, by the story of the family hell-hound, and
      by the desire to frighten old Sir Charles to death. No wonder the
      poor devil of a convict ran and screamed, even as our friend did,
      and as we ourselves might have done, when he saw such a creature
      bounding through the darkness of the moor upon his track. It was
      a cunning device, for, apart from the chance of driving your
      victim to his death, what peasant would venture to inquire too
      closely into such a creature should he get sight of it, as many
      have done, upon the moor? I said it in London, Watson, and I say
      it again now, that never yet have we helped to hunt down a more
      dangerous man than he who is lying yonder”—he swept his long arm
      towards the huge mottled expanse of green-splotched bog which
      stretched away until it merged into the russet slopes of the
      moor.




Chapter 15.
A Retrospection


      It was the end of November, and Holmes and I sat, upon a raw and
      foggy night, on either side of a blazing fire in our sitting-room
      in Baker Street. Since the tragic upshot of our visit to
      Devonshire he had been engaged in two affairs of the utmost
      importance, in the first of which he had exposed the atrocious
      conduct of Colonel Upwood in connection with the famous card
      scandal of the Nonpareil Club, while in the second he had
      defended the unfortunate Mme. Montpensier from the charge of
      murder which hung over her in connection with the death of her
      step-daughter, Mlle. Carére, the young lady who, as it will be
      remembered, was found six months later alive and married in New
      York. My friend was in excellent spirits over the success which
      had attended a succession of difficult and important cases, so
      that I was able to induce him to discuss the details of the
      Baskerville mystery. I had waited patiently for the opportunity
      for I was aware that he would never permit cases to overlap, and
      that his clear and logical mind would not be drawn from its
      present work to dwell upon memories of the past. Sir Henry and
      Dr. Mortimer were, however, in London, on their way to that long
      voyage which had been recommended for the restoration of his
      shattered nerves. They had called upon us that very afternoon, so
      that it was natural that the subject should come up for
      discussion.

      “The whole course of events,” said Holmes, “from the point of
      view of the man who called himself Stapleton was simple and
      direct, although to us, who had no means in the beginning of
      knowing the motives of his actions and could only learn part of
      the facts, it all appeared exceedingly complex. I have had the
      advantage of two conversations with Mrs. Stapleton, and the case
      has now been so entirely cleared up that I am not aware that
      there is anything which has remained a secret to us. You will
      find a few notes upon the matter under the heading B in my
      indexed list of cases.”

      “Perhaps you would kindly give me a sketch of the course of
      events from memory.”

      “Certainly, though I cannot guarantee that I carry all the facts
      in my mind. Intense mental concentration has a curious way of
      blotting out what has passed. The barrister who has his case at
      his fingers’ ends and is able to argue with an expert upon his
      own subject finds that a week or two of the courts will drive it
      all out of his head once more. So each of my cases displaces the
      last, and Mlle. Carére has blurred my recollection of Baskerville
      Hall. Tomorrow some other little problem may be submitted to my
      notice which will in turn dispossess the fair French lady and the
      infamous Upwood. So far as the case of the hound goes, however, I
      will give you the course of events as nearly as I can, and you
      will suggest anything which I may have forgotten.

      “My inquiries show beyond all question that the family portrait
      did not lie, and that this fellow was indeed a Baskerville. He
      was a son of that Rodger Baskerville, the younger brother of Sir
      Charles, who fled with a sinister reputation to South America,
      where he was said to have died unmarried. He did, as a matter of
      fact, marry, and had one child, this fellow, whose real name is
      the same as his father’s. He married Beryl Garcia, one of the
      beauties of Costa Rica, and, having purloined a considerable sum
      of public money, he changed his name to Vandeleur and fled to
      England, where he established a school in the east of Yorkshire.
      His reason for attempting this special line of business was that
      he had struck up an acquaintance with a consumptive tutor upon
      the voyage home, and that he had used this man’s ability to make
      the undertaking a success. Fraser, the tutor, died however, and
      the school which had begun well sank from disrepute into infamy.
      The Vandeleurs found it convenient to change their name to
      Stapleton, and he brought the remains of his fortune, his schemes
      for the future, and his taste for entomology to the south of
      England. I learned at the British Museum that he was a recognized
      authority upon the subject, and that the name of Vandeleur has
      been permanently attached to a certain moth which he had, in his
      Yorkshire days, been the first to describe.

      “We now come to that portion of his life which has proved to be
      of such intense interest to us. The fellow had evidently made
      inquiry and found that only two lives intervened between him and
      a valuable estate. When he went to Devonshire his plans were, I
      believe, exceedingly hazy, but that he meant mischief from the
      first is evident from the way in which he took his wife with him
      in the character of his sister. The idea of using her as a decoy
      was clearly already in his mind, though he may not have been
      certain how the details of his plot were to be arranged. He meant
      in the end to have the estate, and he was ready to use any tool
      or run any risk for that end. His first act was to establish
      himself as near to his ancestral home as he could, and his second
      was to cultivate a friendship with Sir Charles Baskerville and
      with the neighbours.

      “The baronet himself told him about the family hound, and so
      prepared the way for his own death. Stapleton, as I will continue
      to call him, knew that the old man’s heart was weak and that a
      shock would kill him. So much he had learned from Dr. Mortimer.
      He had heard also that Sir Charles was superstitious and had
      taken this grim legend very seriously. His ingenious mind
      instantly suggested a way by which the baronet could be done to
      death, and yet it would be hardly possible to bring home the
      guilt to the real murderer.

      “Having conceived the idea he proceeded to carry it out with
      considerable finesse. An ordinary schemer would have been content
      to work with a savage hound. The use of artificial means to make
      the creature diabolical was a flash of genius upon his part. The
      dog he bought in London from Ross and Mangles, the dealers in
      Fulham Road. It was the strongest and most savage in their
      possession. He brought it down by the North Devon line and walked
      a great distance over the moor so as to get it home without
      exciting any remarks. He had already on his insect hunts learned
      to penetrate the Grimpen Mire, and so had found a safe
      hiding-place for the creature. Here he kennelled it and waited
      his chance.

      “But it was some time coming. The old gentleman could not be
      decoyed outside of his grounds at night. Several times Stapleton
      lurked about with his hound, but without avail. It was during
      these fruitless quests that he, or rather his ally, was seen by
      peasants, and that the legend of the demon dog received a new
      confirmation. He had hoped that his wife might lure Sir Charles
      to his ruin, but here she proved unexpectedly independent. She
      would not endeavour to entangle the old gentleman in a
      sentimental attachment which might deliver him over to his enemy.
      Threats and even, I am sorry to say, blows refused to move her.
      She would have nothing to do with it, and for a time Stapleton
      was at a deadlock.

      “He found a way out of his difficulties through the chance that
      Sir Charles, who had conceived a friendship for him, made him the
      minister of his charity in the case of this unfortunate woman,
      Mrs. Laura Lyons. By representing himself as a single man he
      acquired complete influence over her, and he gave her to
      understand that in the event of her obtaining a divorce from her
      husband he would marry her. His plans were suddenly brought to a
      head by his knowledge that Sir Charles was about to leave the
      Hall on the advice of Dr. Mortimer, with whose opinion he himself
      pretended to coincide. He must act at once, or his victim might
      get beyond his power. He therefore put pressure upon Mrs. Lyons
      to write this letter, imploring the old man to give her an
      interview on the evening before his departure for London. He
      then, by a specious argument, prevented her from going, and so
      had the chance for which he had waited.

      “Driving back in the evening from Coombe Tracey he was in time to
      get his hound, to treat it with his infernal paint, and to bring
      the beast round to the gate at which he had reason to expect that
      he would find the old gentleman waiting. The dog, incited by its
      master, sprang over the wicket-gate and pursued the unfortunate
      baronet, who fled screaming down the yew alley. In that gloomy
      tunnel it must indeed have been a dreadful sight to see that huge
      black creature, with its flaming jaws and blazing eyes, bounding
      after its victim. He fell dead at the end of the alley from heart
      disease and terror. The hound had kept upon the grassy border
      while the baronet had run down the path, so that no track but the
      man’s was visible. On seeing him lying still the creature had
      probably approached to sniff at him, but finding him dead had
      turned away again. It was then that it left the print which was
      actually observed by Dr. Mortimer. The hound was called off and
      hurried away to its lair in the Grimpen Mire, and a mystery was
      left which puzzled the authorities, alarmed the countryside, and
      finally brought the case within the scope of our observation.

      “So much for the death of Sir Charles Baskerville. You perceive
      the devilish cunning of it, for really it would be almost
      impossible to make a case against the real murderer. His only
      accomplice was one who could never give him away, and the
      grotesque, inconceivable nature of the device only served to make
      it more effective. Both of the women concerned in the case, Mrs.
      Stapleton and Mrs. Laura Lyons, were left with a strong suspicion
      against Stapleton. Mrs. Stapleton knew that he had designs upon
      the old man, and also of the existence of the hound. Mrs. Lyons
      knew neither of these things, but had been impressed by the death
      occurring at the time of an uncancelled appointment which was
      only known to him. However, both of them were under his
      influence, and he had nothing to fear from them. The first half
      of his task was successfully accomplished but the more difficult
      still remained.

      “It is possible that Stapleton did not know of the existence of
      an heir in Canada. In any case he would very soon learn it from
      his friend Dr. Mortimer, and he was told by the latter all
      details about the arrival of Henry Baskerville. Stapleton’s first
      idea was that this young stranger from Canada might possibly be
      done to death in London without coming down to Devonshire at all.
      He distrusted his wife ever since she had refused to help him in
      laying a trap for the old man, and he dared not leave her long
      out of his sight for fear he should lose his influence over her.
      It was for this reason that he took her to London with him. They
      lodged, I find, at the Mexborough Private Hotel, in Craven
      Street, which was actually one of those called upon by my agent
      in search of evidence. Here he kept his wife imprisoned in her
      room while he, disguised in a beard, followed Dr. Mortimer to
      Baker Street and afterwards to the station and to the
      Northumberland Hotel. His wife had some inkling of his plans; but
      she had such a fear of her husband—a fear founded upon brutal
      ill-treatment—that she dare not write to warn the man whom she
      knew to be in danger. If the letter should fall into Stapleton’s
      hands her own life would not be safe. Eventually, as we know, she
      adopted the expedient of cutting out the words which would form
      the message, and addressing the letter in a disguised hand. It
      reached the baronet, and gave him the first warning of his
      danger.

      “It was very essential for Stapleton to get some article of Sir
      Henry’s attire so that, in case he was driven to use the dog, he
      might always have the means of setting him upon his track. With
      characteristic promptness and audacity he set about this at once,
      and we cannot doubt that the boots or chamber-maid of the hotel
      was well bribed to help him in his design. By chance, however,
      the first boot which was procured for him was a new one and,
      therefore, useless for his purpose. He then had it returned and
      obtained another—a most instructive incident, since it proved
      conclusively to my mind that we were dealing with a real hound,
      as no other supposition could explain this anxiety to obtain an
      old boot and this indifference to a new one. The more _outré_ and
      grotesque an incident is the more carefully it deserves to be
      examined, and the very point which appears to complicate a case
      is, when duly considered and scientifically handled, the one
      which is most likely to elucidate it.

      “Then we had the visit from our friends next morning, shadowed
      always by Stapleton in the cab. From his knowledge of our rooms
      and of my appearance, as well as from his general conduct, I am
      inclined to think that Stapleton’s career of crime has been by no
      means limited to this single Baskerville affair. It is suggestive
      that during the last three years there have been four
      considerable burglaries in the west country, for none of which
      was any criminal ever arrested. The last of these, at Folkestone
      Court, in May, was remarkable for the cold-blooded pistolling of
      the page, who surprised the masked and solitary burglar. I cannot
      doubt that Stapleton recruited his waning resources in this
      fashion, and that for years he has been a desperate and dangerous
      man.

      “We had an example of his readiness of resource that morning when
      he got away from us so successfully, and also of his audacity in
      sending back my own name to me through the cabman. From that
      moment he understood that I had taken over the case in London,
      and that therefore there was no chance for him there. He returned
      to Dartmoor and awaited the arrival of the baronet.”

      “One moment!” said I. “You have, no doubt, described the sequence
      of events correctly, but there is one point which you have left
      unexplained. What became of the hound when its master was in
      London?”

      “I have given some attention to this matter and it is undoubtedly
      of importance. There can be no question that Stapleton had a
      confidant, though it is unlikely that he ever placed himself in
      his power by sharing all his plans with him. There was an old
      manservant at Merripit House, whose name was Anthony. His
      connection with the Stapletons can be traced for several years,
      as far back as the school-mastering days, so that he must have
      been aware that his master and mistress were really husband and
      wife. This man has disappeared and has escaped from the country.
      It is suggestive that Anthony is not a common name in England,
      while Antonio is so in all Spanish or Spanish-American countries.
      The man, like Mrs. Stapleton herself, spoke good English, but
      with a curious lisping accent. I have myself seen this old man
      cross the Grimpen Mire by the path which Stapleton had marked
      out. It is very probable, therefore, that in the absence of his
      master it was he who cared for the hound, though he may never
      have known the purpose for which the beast was used.

      “The Stapletons then went down to Devonshire, whither they were
      soon followed by Sir Henry and you. One word now as to how I
      stood myself at that time. It may possibly recur to your memory
      that when I examined the paper upon which the printed words were
      fastened I made a close inspection for the water-mark. In doing
      so I held it within a few inches of my eyes, and was conscious of
      a faint smell of the scent known as white jessamine. There are
      seventy-five perfumes, which it is very necessary that a criminal
      expert should be able to distinguish from each other, and cases
      have more than once within my own experience depended upon their
      prompt recognition. The scent suggested the presence of a lady,
      and already my thoughts began to turn towards the Stapletons.
      Thus I had made certain of the hound, and had guessed at the
      criminal before ever we went to the west country.

      “It was my game to watch Stapleton. It was evident, however, that
      I could not do this if I were with you, since he would be keenly
      on his guard. I deceived everybody, therefore, yourself included,
      and I came down secretly when I was supposed to be in London. My
      hardships were not so great as you imagined, though such trifling
      details must never interfere with the investigation of a case. I
      stayed for the most part at Coombe Tracey, and only used the hut
      upon the moor when it was necessary to be near the scene of
      action. Cartwright had come down with me, and in his disguise as
      a country boy he was of great assistance to me. I was dependent
      upon him for food and clean linen. When I was watching Stapleton,
      Cartwright was frequently watching you, so that I was able to
      keep my hand upon all the strings.

      “I have already told you that your reports reached me rapidly,
      being forwarded instantly from Baker Street to Coombe Tracey.
      They were of great service to me, and especially that one
      incidentally truthful piece of biography of Stapleton’s. I was
      able to establish the identity of the man and the woman and knew
      at last exactly how I stood. The case had been considerably
      complicated through the incident of the escaped convict and the
      relations between him and the Barrymores. This also you cleared
      up in a very effective way, though I had already come to the same
      conclusions from my own observations.

      “By the time that you discovered me upon the moor I had a
      complete knowledge of the whole business, but I had not a case
      which could go to a jury. Even Stapleton’s attempt upon Sir Henry
      that night which ended in the death of the unfortunate convict
      did not help us much in proving murder against our man. There
      seemed to be no alternative but to catch him red-handed, and to
      do so we had to use Sir Henry, alone and apparently unprotected,
      as a bait. We did so, and at the cost of a severe shock to our
      client we succeeded in completing our case and driving Stapleton
      to his destruction. That Sir Henry should have been exposed to
      this is, I must confess, a reproach to my management of the case,
      but we had no means of foreseeing the terrible and paralyzing
      spectacle which the beast presented, nor could we predict the fog
      which enabled him to burst upon us at such short notice. We
      succeeded in our object at a cost which both the specialist and
      Dr. Mortimer assure me will be a temporary one. A long journey
      may enable our friend to recover not only from his shattered
      nerves but also from his wounded feelings. His love for the lady
      was deep and sincere, and to him the saddest part of all this
      black business was that he should have been deceived by her.

      “It only remains to indicate the part which she had played
      throughout. There can be no doubt that Stapleton exercised an
      influence over her which may have been love or may have been
      fear, or very possibly both, since they are by no means
      incompatible emotions. It was, at least, absolutely effective. At
      his command she consented to pass as his sister, though he found
      the limits of his power over her when he endeavoured to make her
      the direct accessory to murder. She was ready to warn Sir Henry
      so far as she could without implicating her husband, and again
      and again she tried to do so. Stapleton himself seems to have
      been capable of jealousy, and when he saw the baronet paying
      court to the lady, even though it was part of his own plan, still
      he could not help interrupting with a passionate outburst which
      revealed the fiery soul which his self-contained manner so
      cleverly concealed. By encouraging the intimacy he made it
      certain that Sir Henry would frequently come to Merripit House
      and that he would sooner or later get the opportunity which he
      desired. On the day of the crisis, however, his wife turned
      suddenly against him. She had learned something of the death of
      the convict, and she knew that the hound was being kept in the
      outhouse on the evening that Sir Henry was coming to dinner. She
      taxed her husband with his intended crime, and a furious scene
      followed in which he showed her for the first time that she had a
      rival in his love. Her fidelity turned in an instant to bitter
      hatred, and he saw that she would betray him. He tied her up,
      therefore, that she might have no chance of warning Sir Henry,
      and he hoped, no doubt, that when the whole countryside put down
      the baronet’s death to the curse of his family, as they certainly
      would do, he could win his wife back to accept an accomplished
      fact and to keep silent upon what she knew. In this I fancy that
      in any case he made a miscalculation, and that, if we had not
      been there, his doom would none the less have been sealed. A
      woman of Spanish blood does not condone such an injury so
      lightly. And now, my dear Watson, without referring to my notes,
      I cannot give you a more detailed account of this curious case. I
      do not know that anything essential has been left unexplained.”

      “He could not hope to frighten Sir Henry to death as he had done
      the old uncle with his bogie hound.”

      “The beast was savage and half-starved. If its appearance did not
      frighten its victim to death, at least it would paralyze the
      resistance which might be offered.”

      “No doubt. There only remains one difficulty. If Stapleton came
      into the succession, how could he explain the fact that he, the
      heir, had been living unannounced under another name so close to
      the property? How could he claim it without causing suspicion and
      inquiry?”

      “It is a formidable difficulty, and I fear that you ask too much
      when you expect me to solve it. The past and the present are
      within the field of my inquiry, but what a man may do in the
      future is a hard question to answer. Mrs. Stapleton has heard her
      husband discuss the problem on several occasions. There were
      three possible courses. He might claim the property from South
      America, establish his identity before the British authorities
      there and so obtain the fortune without ever coming to England at
      all, or he might adopt an elaborate disguise during the short
      time that he need be in London; or, again, he might furnish an
      accomplice with the proofs and papers, putting him in as heir,
      and retaining a claim upon some proportion of his income. We
      cannot doubt from what we know of him that he would have found
      some way out of the difficulty. And now, my dear Watson, we have
      had some weeks of severe work, and for one evening, I think, we
      may turn our thoughts into more pleasant channels. I have a box
      for _Les Huguenots_. Have you heard the De Reszkes? Might I
      trouble you then to be ready in half an hour, and we can stop at
      Marcini’s for a little dinner on the way?”


THE END



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOUND OF THE BASKERVILLES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.




﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Return of Sherlock Holmes
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Return of Sherlock Holmes

Author: Arthur Conan Doyle

Release date: March 8, 2006 [eBook #108]
                Most recently updated: December 23, 2025

Language: English

Credits: An Anonymous Volunteer


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RETURN OF SHERLOCK HOLMES ***



The Return of Sherlock Holmes


by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle


Contents

 The Adventure of the Empty House
 The Adventure of the Norwood Builder
 The Adventure of the Dancing Men
 The Adventure of the Solitary Cyclist
 The Adventure of the Priory School
 The Adventure of Black Peter.
 The Adventure of Charles Augustus Milverton
 The Adventure of the Six Napoleons
 The Adventure of the Three Students
 The Adventure of the Golden Pince-Nez
 The Adventure of the Missing Three-Quarter
 The Adventure of the Abbey Grange
 The Adventure of the Second Stain




THE ADVENTURE OF THE EMPTY HOUSE


      It was in the spring of the year 1894 that all London was
      interested, and the fashionable world dismayed, by the murder of
      the Honourable Ronald Adair under most unusual and inexplicable
      circumstances. The public has already learned those particulars
      of the crime which came out in the police investigation, but a
      good deal was suppressed upon that occasion, since the case for
      the prosecution was so overwhelmingly strong that it was not
      necessary to bring forward all the facts. Only now, at the end of
      nearly ten years, am I allowed to supply those missing links
      which make up the whole of that remarkable chain. The crime was
      of interest in itself, but that interest was as nothing to me
      compared to the inconceivable sequel, which afforded me the
      greatest shock and surprise of any event in my adventurous life.
      Even now, after this long interval, I find myself thrilling as I
      think of it, and feeling once more that sudden flood of joy,
      amazement, and incredulity which utterly submerged my mind. Let
      me say to that public, which has shown some interest in those
      glimpses which I have occasionally given them of the thoughts and
      actions of a very remarkable man, that they are not to blame me
      if I have not shared my knowledge with them, for I should have
      considered it my first duty to do so, had I not been barred by a
      positive prohibition from his own lips, which was only withdrawn
      upon the third of last month.

      It can be imagined that my close intimacy with Sherlock Holmes
      had interested me deeply in crime, and that after his
      disappearance I never failed to read with care the various
      problems which came before the public. And I even attempted, more
      than once, for my own private satisfaction, to employ his methods
      in their solution, though with indifferent success. There was
      none, however, which appealed to me like this tragedy of Ronald
      Adair. As I read the evidence at the inquest, which led up to a
      verdict of willful murder against some person or persons unknown,
      I realized more clearly than I had ever done the loss which the
      community had sustained by the death of Sherlock Holmes. There
      were points about this strange business which would, I was sure,
      have specially appealed to him, and the efforts of the police
      would have been supplemented, or more probably anticipated, by
      the trained observation and the alert mind of the first criminal
      agent in Europe. All day, as I drove upon my round, I turned over
      the case in my mind and found no explanation which appeared to me
      to be adequate. At the risk of telling a twice-told tale, I will
      recapitulate the facts as they were known to the public at the
      conclusion of the inquest.

      The Honourable Ronald Adair was the second son of the Earl of
      Maynooth, at that time governor of one of the Australian
      colonies. Adair’s mother had returned from Australia to undergo
      the operation for cataract, and she, her son Ronald, and her
      daughter Hilda were living together at 427, Park Lane. The youth
      moved in the best society—had, so far as was known, no enemies
      and no particular vices. He had been engaged to Miss Edith
      Woodley, of Carstairs, but the engagement had been broken off by
      mutual consent some months before, and there was no sign that it
      had left any very profound feeling behind it. For the rest, the
      man’s life moved in a narrow and conventional circle, for his
      habits were quiet and his nature unemotional. Yet it was upon
      this easy-going young aristocrat that death came, in most strange
      and unexpected form, between the hours of ten and eleven-twenty
      on the night of March 30, 1894.

      Ronald Adair was fond of cards—playing continually, but never for
      such stakes as would hurt him. He was a member of the Baldwin,
      the Cavendish, and the Bagatelle card clubs. It was shown that,
      after dinner on the day of his death, he had played a rubber of
      whist at the latter club. He had also played there in the
      afternoon. The evidence of those who had played with him—Mr.
      Murray, Sir John Hardy, and Colonel Moran—showed that the game
      was whist, and that there was a fairly equal fall of the cards.
      Adair might have lost five pounds, but not more. His fortune was
      a considerable one, and such a loss could not in any way affect
      him. He had played nearly every day at one club or other, but he
      was a cautious player, and usually rose a winner. It came out in
      evidence that, in partnership with Colonel Moran, he had actually
      won as much as four hundred and twenty pounds in a sitting, some
      weeks before, from Godfrey Milner and Lord Balmoral. So much for
      his recent history as it came out at the inquest.

      On the evening of the crime, he returned from the club exactly at
      ten. His mother and sister were out spending the evening with a
      relation. The servant deposed that she heard him enter the front
      room on the second floor, generally used as his sitting-room. She
      had lit a fire there, and as it smoked she had opened the window.
      No sound was heard from the room until eleven-twenty, the hour of
      the return of Lady Maynooth and her daughter. Desiring to say
      good-night, she attempted to enter her son’s room. The door was
      locked on the inside, and no answer could be got to their cries
      and knocking. Help was obtained, and the door forced. The
      unfortunate young man was found lying near the table. His head
      had been horribly mutilated by an expanding revolver bullet, but
      no weapon of any sort was to be found in the room. On the table
      lay two banknotes for ten pounds each and seventeen pounds ten in
      silver and gold, the money arranged in little piles of varying
      amount. There were some figures also upon a sheet of paper, with
      the names of some club friends opposite to them, from which it
      was conjectured that before his death he was endeavouring to make
      out his losses or winnings at cards.

      A minute examination of the circumstances served only to make the
      case more complex. In the first place, no reason could be given
      why the young man should have fastened the door upon the inside.
      There was the possibility that the murderer had done this, and
      had afterwards escaped by the window. The drop was at least
      twenty feet, however, and a bed of crocuses in full bloom lay
      beneath. Neither the flowers nor the earth showed any sign of
      having been disturbed, nor were there any marks upon the narrow
      strip of grass which separated the house from the road.
      Apparently, therefore, it was the young man himself who had
      fastened the door. But how did he come by his death? No one could
      have climbed up to the window without leaving traces. Suppose a
      man had fired through the window, he would indeed be a remarkable
      shot who could with a revolver inflict so deadly a wound. Again,
      Park Lane is a frequented thoroughfare; there is a cab stand
      within a hundred yards of the house. No one had heard a shot. And
      yet there was the dead man and there the revolver bullet, which
      had mushroomed out, as soft-nosed bullets will, and so inflicted
      a wound which must have caused instantaneous death. Such were the
      circumstances of the Park Lane Mystery, which were further
      complicated by entire absence of motive, since, as I have said,
      young Adair was not known to have any enemy, and no attempt had
      been made to remove the money or valuables in the room.

      All day I turned these facts over in my mind, endeavouring to hit
      upon some theory which could reconcile them all, and to find that
      line of least resistance which my poor friend had declared to be
      the starting-point of every investigation. I confess that I made
      little progress. In the evening I strolled across the Park, and
      found myself about six o’clock at the Oxford Street end of Park
      Lane. A group of loafers upon the pavements, all staring up at a
      particular window, directed me to the house which I had come to
      see. A tall, thin man with coloured glasses, whom I strongly
      suspected of being a plain-clothes detective, was pointing out
      some theory of his own, while the others crowded round to listen
      to what he said. I got as near him as I could, but his
      observations seemed to me to be absurd, so I withdrew again in
      some disgust. As I did so I struck against an elderly, deformed
      man, who had been behind me, and I knocked down several books
      which he was carrying. I remember that as I picked them up, I
      observed the title of one of them, _The Origin of Tree Worship_,
      and it struck me that the fellow must be some poor bibliophile,
      who, either as a trade or as a hobby, was a collector of obscure
      volumes. I endeavoured to apologize for the accident, but it was
      evident that these books which I had so unfortunately maltreated
      were very precious objects in the eyes of their owner. With a
      snarl of contempt he turned upon his heel, and I saw his curved
      back and white side-whiskers disappear among the throng.

      My observations of No. 427, Park Lane did little to clear up the
      problem in which I was interested. The house was separated from
      the street by a low wall and railing, the whole not more than
      five feet high. It was perfectly easy, therefore, for anyone to
      get into the garden, but the window was entirely inaccessible,
      since there was no waterpipe or anything which could help the
      most active man to climb it. More puzzled than ever, I retraced
      my steps to Kensington. I had not been in my study five minutes
      when the maid entered to say that a person desired to see me. To
      my astonishment it was none other than my strange old book
      collector, his sharp, wizened face peering out from a frame of
      white hair, and his precious volumes, a dozen of them at least,
      wedged under his right arm.

      “You’re surprised to see me, sir,” said he, in a strange,
      croaking voice.

      I acknowledged that I was.

      “Well, I’ve a conscience, sir, and when I chanced to see you go
      into this house, as I came hobbling after you, I thought to
      myself, I’ll just step in and see that kind gentleman, and tell
      him that if I was a bit gruff in my manner there was not any harm
      meant, and that I am much obliged to him for picking up my
      books.”

      “You make too much of a trifle,” said I. “May I ask how you knew
      who I was?”

      “Well, sir, if it isn’t too great a liberty, I am a neighbour of
      yours, for you’ll find my little bookshop at the corner of Church
      Street, and very happy to see you, I am sure. Maybe you collect
      yourself, sir. Here’s _British Birds_, and _Catullus_, and _The
      Holy War_—a bargain, every one of them. With five volumes you
      could just fill that gap on that second shelf. It looks untidy,
      does it not, sir?”

      I moved my head to look at the cabinet behind me. When I turned
      again, Sherlock Holmes was standing smiling at me across my study
      table. I rose to my feet, stared at him for some seconds in utter
      amazement, and then it appears that I must have fainted for the
      first and the last time in my life. Certainly a grey mist swirled
      before my eyes, and when it cleared I found my collar-ends undone
      and the tingling after-taste of brandy upon my lips. Holmes was
      bending over my chair, his flask in his hand.

      “My dear Watson,” said the well-remembered voice, “I owe you a
      thousand apologies. I had no idea that you would be so affected.”

      I gripped him by the arms.

      “Holmes!” I cried. “Is it really you? Can it indeed be that you
      are alive? Is it possible that you succeeded in climbing out of
      that awful abyss?”

      “Wait a moment,” said he. “Are you sure that you are really fit
      to discuss things? I have given you a serious shock by my
      unnecessarily dramatic reappearance.”

      “I am all right, but indeed, Holmes, I can hardly believe my
      eyes. Good heavens! to think that you—you of all men—should be
      standing in my study.” Again I gripped him by the sleeve, and
      felt the thin, sinewy arm beneath it. “Well, you’re not a spirit
      anyhow,” said I. “My dear chap, I’m overjoyed to see you. Sit
      down, and tell me how you came alive out of that dreadful chasm.”

      He sat opposite to me, and lit a cigarette in his old, nonchalant
      manner. He was dressed in the seedy frockcoat of the book
      merchant, but the rest of that individual lay in a pile of white
      hair and old books upon the table. Holmes looked even thinner and
      keener than of old, but there was a dead-white tinge in his
      aquiline face which told me that his life recently had not been a
      healthy one.

      “I am glad to stretch myself, Watson,” said he. “It is no joke
      when a tall man has to take a foot off his stature for several
      hours on end. Now, my dear fellow, in the matter of these
      explanations, we have, if I may ask for your cooperation, a hard
      and dangerous night’s work in front of us. Perhaps it would be
      better if I gave you an account of the whole situation when that
      work is finished.”

      “I am full of curiosity. I should much prefer to hear now.”

      “You’ll come with me to-night?”

      “When you like and where you like.”

      “This is, indeed, like the old days. We shall have time for a
      mouthful of dinner before we need go. Well, then, about that
      chasm. I had no serious difficulty in getting out of it, for the
      very simple reason that I never was in it.”

      “You never were in it?”

      “No, Watson, I never was in it. My note to you was absolutely
      genuine. I had little doubt that I had come to the end of my
      career when I perceived the somewhat sinister figure of the late
      Professor Moriarty standing upon the narrow pathway which led to
      safety. I read an inexorable purpose in his grey eyes. I
      exchanged some remarks with him, therefore, and obtained his
      courteous permission to write the short note which you afterwards
      received. I left it with my cigarette-box and my stick, and I
      walked along the pathway, Moriarty still at my heels. When I
      reached the end I stood at bay. He drew no weapon, but he rushed
      at me and threw his long arms around me. He knew that his own
      game was up, and was only anxious to revenge himself upon me. We
      tottered together upon the brink of the fall. I have some
      knowledge, however, of baritsu, or the Japanese system of
      wrestling, which has more than once been very useful to me. I
      slipped through his grip, and he with a horrible scream kicked
      madly for a few seconds, and clawed the air with both his hands.
      But for all his efforts he could not get his balance, and over he
      went. With my face over the brink, I saw him fall for a long way.
      Then he struck a rock, bounded off, and splashed into the water.”

      I listened with amazement to this explanation, which Holmes
      delivered between the puffs of his cigarette.

      “But the tracks!” I cried. “I saw, with my own eyes, that two
      went down the path and none returned.”

      “It came about in this way. The instant that the Professor had
      disappeared, it struck me what a really extraordinarily lucky
      chance Fate had placed in my way. I knew that Moriarty was not
      the only man who had sworn my death. There were at least three
      others whose desire for vengeance upon me would only be increased
      by the death of their leader. They were all most dangerous men.
      One or other would certainly get me. On the other hand, if all
      the world was convinced that I was dead they would take
      liberties, these men, they would soon lay themselves open, and
      sooner or later I could destroy them. Then it would be time for
      me to announce that I was still in the land of the living. So
      rapidly does the brain act that I believe I had thought this all
      out before Professor Moriarty had reached the bottom of the
      Reichenbach Fall.

      “I stood up and examined the rocky wall behind me. In your
      picturesque account of the matter, which I read with great
      interest some months later, you assert that the wall was sheer.
      That was not literally true. A few small footholds presented
      themselves, and there was some indication of a ledge. The cliff
      is so high that to climb it all was an obvious impossibility, and
      it was equally impossible to make my way along the wet path
      without leaving some tracks. I might, it is true, have reversed
      my boots, as I have done on similar occasions, but the sight of
      three sets of tracks in one direction would certainly have
      suggested a deception. On the whole, then, it was best that I
      should risk the climb. It was not a pleasant business, Watson.
      The fall roared beneath me. I am not a fanciful person, but I
      give you my word that I seemed to hear Moriarty’s voice screaming
      at me out of the abyss. A mistake would have been fatal. More
      than once, as tufts of grass came out in my hand or my foot
      slipped in the wet notches of the rock, I thought that I was
      gone. But I struggled upward, and at last I reached a ledge
      several feet deep and covered with soft green moss, where I could
      lie unseen, in the most perfect comfort. There I was stretched,
      when you, my dear Watson, and all your following were
      investigating in the most sympathetic and inefficient manner the
      circumstances of my death.

      “At last, when you had all formed your inevitable and totally
      erroneous conclusions, you departed for the hotel, and I was left
      alone. I had imagined that I had reached the end of my
      adventures, but a very unexpected occurrence showed me that there
      were surprises still in store for me. A huge rock, falling from
      above, boomed past me, struck the path, and bounded over into the
      chasm. For an instant I thought that it was an accident, but a
      moment later, looking up, I saw a man’s head against the
      darkening sky, and another stone struck the very ledge upon which
      I was stretched, within a foot of my head. Of course, the meaning
      of this was obvious. Moriarty had not been alone. A
      confederate—and even that one glance had told me how dangerous a
      man that confederate was—had kept guard while the Professor had
      attacked me. From a distance, unseen by me, he had been a witness
      of his friend’s death and of my escape. He had waited, and then
      making his way round to the top of the cliff, he had endeavoured
      to succeed where his comrade had failed.

      “I did not take long to think about it, Watson. Again I saw that
      grim face look over the cliff, and I knew that it was the
      precursor of another stone. I scrambled down on to the path. I
      don’t think I could have done it in cold blood. It was a hundred
      times more difficult than getting up. But I had no time to think
      of the danger, for another stone sang past me as I hung by my
      hands from the edge of the ledge. Halfway down I slipped, but, by
      the blessing of God, I landed, torn and bleeding, upon the path.
      I took to my heels, did ten miles over the mountains in the
      darkness, and a week later I found myself in Florence, with the
      certainty that no one in the world knew what had become of me.

      “I had only one confidant—my brother Mycroft. I owe you many
      apologies, my dear Watson, but it was all-important that it
      should be thought I was dead, and it is quite certain that you
      would not have written so convincing an account of my unhappy end
      had you not yourself thought that it was true. Several times
      during the last three years I have taken up my pen to write to
      you, but always I feared lest your affectionate regard for me
      should tempt you to some indiscretion which would betray my
      secret. For that reason I turned away from you this evening when
      you upset my books, for I was in danger at the time, and any show
      of surprise and emotion upon your part might have drawn attention
      to my identity and led to the most deplorable and irreparable
      results. As to Mycroft, I had to confide in him in order to
      obtain the money which I needed. The course of events in London
      did not run so well as I had hoped, for the trial of the Moriarty
      gang left two of its most dangerous members, my own most
      vindictive enemies, at liberty. I travelled for two years in
      Tibet, therefore, and amused myself by visiting Lhassa, and
      spending some days with the head lama. You may have read of the
      remarkable explorations of a Norwegian named Sigerson, but I am
      sure that it never occurred to you that you were receiving news
      of your friend. I then passed through Persia, looked in at Mecca,
      and paid a short but interesting visit to the Khalifa at Khartoum
      the results of which I have communicated to the Foreign Office.
      Returning to France, I spent some months in a research into the
      coal-tar derivatives, which I conducted in a laboratory at
      Montpellier, in the south of France. Having concluded this to my
      satisfaction and learning that only one of my enemies was now
      left in London, I was about to return when my movements were
      hastened by the news of this very remarkable Park Lane Mystery,
      which not only appealed to me by its own merits, but which seemed
      to offer some most peculiar personal opportunities. I came over
      at once to London, called in my own person at Baker Street, threw
      Mrs. Hudson into violent hysterics, and found that Mycroft had
      preserved my rooms and my papers exactly as they had always been.
      So it was, my dear Watson, that at two o’clock to-day I found
      myself in my old armchair in my own old room, and only wishing
      that I could have seen my old friend Watson in the other chair
      which he has so often adorned.”

      Such was the remarkable narrative to which I listened on that
      April evening—a narrative which would have been utterly
      incredible to me had it not been confirmed by the actual sight of
      the tall, spare figure and the keen, eager face, which I had
      never thought to see again. In some manner he had learned of my
      own sad bereavement, and his sympathy was shown in his manner
      rather than in his words. “Work is the best antidote to sorrow,
      my dear Watson,” said he; “and I have a piece of work for us both
      to-night which, if we can bring it to a successful conclusion,
      will in itself justify a man’s life on this planet.” In vain I
      begged him to tell me more. “You will hear and see enough before
      morning,” he answered. “We have three years of the past to
      discuss. Let that suffice until half-past nine, when we start
      upon the notable adventure of the empty house.”

      It was indeed like old times when, at that hour, I found myself
      seated beside him in a hansom, my revolver in my pocket, and the
      thrill of adventure in my heart. Holmes was cold and stern and
      silent. As the gleam of the street-lamps flashed upon his austere
      features, I saw that his brows were drawn down in thought and his
      thin lips compressed. I knew not what wild beast we were about to
      hunt down in the dark jungle of criminal London, but I was well
      assured, from the bearing of this master huntsman, that the
      adventure was a most grave one—while the sardonic smile which
      occasionally broke through his ascetic gloom boded little good
      for the object of our quest.

      I had imagined that we were bound for Baker Street, but Holmes
      stopped the cab at the corner of Cavendish Square. I observed
      that as he stepped out he gave a most searching glance to right
      and left, and at every subsequent street corner he took the
      utmost pains to assure that he was not followed. Our route was
      certainly a singular one. Holmes’s knowledge of the byways of
      London was extraordinary, and on this occasion he passed rapidly
      and with an assured step through a network of mews and stables,
      the very existence of which I had never known. We emerged at last
      into a small road, lined with old, gloomy houses, which led us
      into Manchester Street, and so to Blandford Street. Here he
      turned swiftly down a narrow passage, passed through a wooden
      gate into a deserted yard, and then opened with a key the back
      door of a house. We entered together, and he closed it behind us.

      The place was pitch dark, but it was evident to me that it was an
      empty house. Our feet creaked and crackled over the bare
      planking, and my outstretched hand touched a wall from which the
      paper was hanging in ribbons. Holmes’s cold, thin fingers closed
      round my wrist and led me forward down a long hall, until I dimly
      saw the murky fanlight over the door. Here Holmes turned suddenly
      to the right and we found ourselves in a large, square, empty
      room, heavily shadowed in the corners, but faintly lit in the
      centre from the lights of the street beyond. There was no lamp
      near, and the window was thick with dust, so that we could only
      just discern each other’s figures within. My companion put his
      hand upon my shoulder and his lips close to my ear.

      “Do you know where we are?” he whispered.

      “Surely that is Baker Street,” I answered, staring through the
      dim window.

      “Exactly. We are in Camden House, which stands opposite to our
      own old quarters.”

      “But why are we here?”

      “Because it commands so excellent a view of that picturesque
      pile. Might I trouble you, my dear Watson, to draw a little
      nearer to the window, taking every precaution not to show
      yourself, and then to look up at our old rooms—the starting-point
      of so many of your little fairy-tales? We will see if my three
      years of absence have entirely taken away my power to surprise
      you.”

      I crept forward and looked across at the familiar window. As my
      eyes fell upon it, I gave a gasp and a cry of amazement. The
      blind was down, and a strong light was burning in the room. The
      shadow of a man who was seated in a chair within was thrown in
      hard, black outline upon the luminous screen of the window. There
      was no mistaking the poise of the head, the squareness of the
      shoulders, the sharpness of the features. The face was turned
      half-round, and the effect was that of one of those black
      silhouettes which our grandparents loved to frame. It was a
      perfect reproduction of Holmes. So amazed was I that I threw out
      my hand to make sure that the man himself was standing beside me.
      He was quivering with silent laughter.

      “Well?” said he.

      “Good heavens!” I cried. “It is marvellous.”

      “I trust that age doth not wither nor custom stale my infinite
      variety,” said he, and I recognized in his voice the joy and
      pride which the artist takes in his own creation. “It really is
      rather like me, is it not?”

      “I should be prepared to swear that it was you.”

      “The credit of the execution is due to Monsieur Oscar Meunier, of
      Grenoble, who spent some days in doing the moulding. It is a bust
      in wax. The rest I arranged myself during my visit to Baker
      Street this afternoon.”

      “But why?”

      “Because, my dear Watson, I had the strongest possible reason for
      wishing certain people to think that I was there when I was
      really elsewhere.”

      “And you thought the rooms were watched?”

      “I _knew_ that they were watched.”

      “By whom?”

      “By my old enemies, Watson. By the charming society whose leader
      lies in the Reichenbach Fall. You must remember that they knew,
      and only they knew, that I was still alive. Sooner or later they
      believed that I should come back to my rooms. They watched them
      continuously, and this morning they saw me arrive.”

      “How do you know?”

      “Because I recognized their sentinel when I glanced out of my
      window. He is a harmless enough fellow, Parker by name, a
      garroter by trade, and a remarkable performer upon the
      jew’s-harp. I cared nothing for him. But I cared a great deal for
      the much more formidable person who was behind him, the bosom
      friend of Moriarty, the man who dropped the rocks over the cliff,
      the most cunning and dangerous criminal in London. That is the
      man who is after me to-night Watson, and that is the man who is
      quite unaware that we are after _him_.”

      My friend’s plans were gradually revealing themselves. From this
      convenient retreat, the watchers were being watched and the
      trackers tracked. That angular shadow up yonder was the bait, and
      we were the hunters. In silence we stood together in the darkness
      and watched the hurrying figures who passed and repassed in front
      of us. Holmes was silent and motionless; but I could tell that he
      was keenly alert, and that his eyes were fixed intently upon the
      stream of passers-by. It was a bleak and boisterous night and the
      wind whistled shrilly down the long street. Many people were
      moving to and fro, most of them muffled in their coats and
      cravats. Once or twice it seemed to me that I had seen the same
      figure before, and I especially noticed two men who appeared to
      be sheltering themselves from the wind in the doorway of a house
      some distance up the street. I tried to draw my companion’s
      attention to them; but he gave a little ejaculation of
      impatience, and continued to stare into the street. More than
      once he fidgeted with his feet and tapped rapidly with his
      fingers upon the wall. It was evident to me that he was becoming
      uneasy, and that his plans were not working out altogether as he
      had hoped. At last, as midnight approached and the street
      gradually cleared, he paced up and down the room in
      uncontrollable agitation. I was about to make some remark to him,
      when I raised my eyes to the lighted window, and again
      experienced almost as great a surprise as before. I clutched
      Holmes’s arm, and pointed upward.

      “The shadow has moved!” I cried.

      It was indeed no longer the profile, but the back, which was
      turned towards us.

      Three years had certainly not smoothed the asperities of his
      temper or his impatience with a less active intelligence than his
      own.

      “Of course it has moved,” said he. “Am I such a farcical bungler,
      Watson, that I should erect an obvious dummy, and expect that
      some of the sharpest men in Europe would be deceived by it? We
      have been in this room two hours, and Mrs. Hudson has made some
      change in that figure eight times, or once in every quarter of an
      hour. She works it from the front, so that her shadow may never
      be seen. Ah!” He drew in his breath with a shrill, excited
      intake. In the dim light I saw his head thrown forward, his whole
      attitude rigid with attention. Outside the street was absolutely
      deserted. Those two men might still be crouching in the doorway,
      but I could no longer see them. All was still and dark, save only
      that brilliant yellow screen in front of us with the black figure
      outlined upon its centre. Again in the utter silence I heard that
      thin, sibilant note which spoke of intense suppressed excitement.
      An instant later he pulled me back into the blackest corner of
      the room, and I felt his warning hand upon my lips. The fingers
      which clutched me were quivering. Never had I known my friend
      more moved, and yet the dark street still stretched lonely and
      motionless before us.

      But suddenly I was aware of that which his keener senses had
      already distinguished. A low, stealthy sound came to my ears, not
      from the direction of Baker Street, but from the back of the very
      house in which we lay concealed. A door opened and shut. An
      instant later steps crept down the passage—steps which were meant
      to be silent, but which reverberated harshly through the empty
      house. Holmes crouched back against the wall, and I did the same,
      my hand closing upon the handle of my revolver. Peering through
      the gloom, I saw the vague outline of a man, a shade blacker than
      the blackness of the open door. He stood for an instant, and then
      he crept forward, crouching, menacing, into the room. He was
      within three yards of us, this sinister figure, and I had braced
      myself to meet his spring, before I realized that he had no idea
      of our presence. He passed close beside us, stole over to the
      window, and very softly and noiselessly raised it for half a
      foot. As he sank to the level of this opening, the light of the
      street, no longer dimmed by the dusty glass, fell full upon his
      face. The man seemed to be beside himself with excitement. His
      two eyes shone like stars, and his features were working
      convulsively. He was an elderly man, with a thin, projecting
      nose, a high, bald forehead, and a huge grizzled moustache. An
      opera hat was pushed to the back of his head, and an evening
      dress shirt-front gleamed out through his open overcoat. His face
      was gaunt and swarthy, scored with deep, savage lines. In his
      hand he carried what appeared to be a stick, but as he laid it
      down upon the floor it gave a metallic clang. Then from the
      pocket of his overcoat he drew a bulky object, and he busied
      himself in some task which ended with a loud, sharp click, as if
      a spring or bolt had fallen into its place. Still kneeling upon
      the floor he bent forward and threw all his weight and strength
      upon some lever, with the result that there came a long,
      whirling, grinding noise, ending once more in a powerful click.
      He straightened himself then, and I saw that what he held in his
      hand was a sort of gun, with a curiously misshapen butt. He
      opened it at the breech, put something in, and snapped the
      breech-lock. Then, crouching down, he rested the end of the
      barrel upon the ledge of the open window, and I saw his long
      moustache droop over the stock and his eye gleam as it peered
      along the sights. I heard a little sigh of satisfaction as he
      cuddled the butt into his shoulder; and saw that amazing target,
      the black man on the yellow ground, standing clear at the end of
      his foresight. For an instant he was rigid and motionless. Then
      his finger tightened on the trigger. There was a strange, loud
      whiz and a long, silvery tinkle of broken glass. At that instant
      Holmes sprang like a tiger on to the marksman’s back, and hurled
      him flat upon his face. He was up again in a moment, and with
      convulsive strength he seized Holmes by the throat, but I struck
      him on the head with the butt of my revolver, and he dropped
      again upon the floor. I fell upon him, and as I held him my
      comrade blew a shrill call upon a whistle. There was the clatter
      of running feet upon the pavement, and two policemen in uniform,
      with one plain-clothes detective, rushed through the front
      entrance and into the room.

      “That you, Lestrade?” said Holmes.

      “Yes, Mr. Holmes. I took the job myself. It’s good to see you
      back in London, sir.”

      “I think you want a little unofficial help. Three undetected
      murders in one year won’t do, Lestrade. But you handled the
      Molesey Mystery with less than your usual—that’s to say, you
      handled it fairly well.”

      We had all risen to our feet, our prisoner breathing hard, with a
      stalwart constable on each side of him. Already a few loiterers
      had begun to collect in the street. Holmes stepped up to the
      window, closed it, and dropped the blinds. Lestrade had produced
      two candles, and the policemen had uncovered their lanterns. I
      was able at last to have a good look at our prisoner.

      It was a tremendously virile and yet sinister face which was
      turned towards us. With the brow of a philosopher above and the
      jaw of a sensualist below, the man must have started with great
      capacities for good or for evil. But one could not look upon his
      cruel blue eyes, with their drooping, cynical lids, or upon the
      fierce, aggressive nose and the threatening, deep-lined brow,
      without reading Nature’s plainest danger-signals. He took no heed
      of any of us, but his eyes were fixed upon Holmes’s face with an
      expression in which hatred and amazement were equally blended.
      “You fiend!” he kept on muttering. “You clever, clever fiend!”

      “Ah, Colonel!” said Holmes, arranging his rumpled collar.
      “‘Journeys end in lovers’ meetings,’ as the old play says. I
      don’t think I have had the pleasure of seeing you since you
      favoured me with those attentions as I lay on the ledge above the
      Reichenbach Fall.”

      The colonel still stared at my friend like a man in a trance.
      “You cunning, cunning fiend!” was all that he could say.

      “I have not introduced you yet,” said Holmes. “This, gentlemen,
      is Colonel Sebastian Moran, once of Her Majesty’s Indian Army,
      and the best heavy-game shot that our Eastern Empire has ever
      produced. I believe I am correct Colonel, in saying that your bag
      of tigers still remains unrivalled?”

      The fierce old man said nothing, but still glared at my
      companion. With his savage eyes and bristling moustache he was
      wonderfully like a tiger himself.

      “I wonder that my very simple stratagem could deceive so old a
      _shikari_,” said Holmes. “It must be very familiar to you. Have
      you not tethered a young kid under a tree, lain above it with
      your rifle, and waited for the bait to bring up your tiger? This
      empty house is my tree, and you are my tiger. You have possibly
      had other guns in reserve in case there should be several tigers,
      or in the unlikely supposition of your own aim failing you.
      These,” he pointed around, “are my other guns. The parallel is
      exact.”

      Colonel Moran sprang forward with a snarl of rage, but the
      constables dragged him back. The fury upon his face was terrible
      to look at.

      “I confess that you had one small surprise for me,” said Holmes.
      “I did not anticipate that you would yourself make use of this
      empty house and this convenient front window. I had imagined you
      as operating from the street, where my friend, Lestrade and his
      merry men were awaiting you. With that exception, all has gone as
      I expected.”

      Colonel Moran turned to the official detective.

      “You may or may not have just cause for arresting me,” said he,
      “but at least there can be no reason why I should submit to the
      gibes of this person. If I am in the hands of the law, let things
      be done in a legal way.”

      “Well, that’s reasonable enough,” said Lestrade. “Nothing further
      you have to say, Mr. Holmes, before we go?”

      Holmes had picked up the powerful air-gun from the floor, and was
      examining its mechanism.

      “An admirable and unique weapon,” said he, “noiseless and of
      tremendous power: I knew Von Herder, the blind German mechanic,
      who constructed it to the order of the late Professor Moriarty.
      For years I have been aware of its existence though I have never
      before had the opportunity of handling it. I commend it very
      specially to your attention, Lestrade and also the bullets which
      fit it.”

      “You can trust us to look after that, Mr. Holmes,” said Lestrade,
      as the whole party moved towards the door. “Anything further to
      say?”

      “Only to ask what charge you intend to prefer?”

      “What charge, sir? Why, of course, the attempted murder of Mr.
      Sherlock Holmes.”

      “Not so, Lestrade. I do not propose to appear in the matter at
      all. To you, and to you only, belongs the credit of the
      remarkable arrest which you have effected. Yes, Lestrade, I
      congratulate you! With your usual happy mixture of cunning and
      audacity, you have got him.”

      “Got him! Got whom, Mr. Holmes?”

      “The man that the whole force has been seeking in vain—Colonel
      Sebastian Moran, who shot the Honourable Ronald Adair with an
      expanding bullet from an air-gun through the open window of the
      second-floor front of No. 427, Park Lane, upon the thirtieth of
      last month. That’s the charge, Lestrade. And now, Watson, if you
      can endure the draught from a broken window, I think that half an
      hour in my study over a cigar may afford you some profitable
      amusement.”

      Our old chambers had been left unchanged through the supervision
      of Mycroft Holmes and the immediate care of Mrs. Hudson. As I
      entered I saw, it is true, an unwonted tidiness, but the old
      landmarks were all in their place. There were the chemical corner
      and the acid-stained, deal-topped table. There upon a shelf was
      the row of formidable scrap-books and books of reference which
      many of our fellow-citizens would have been so glad to burn. The
      diagrams, the violin-case, and the pipe-rack—even the Persian
      slipper which contained the tobacco—all met my eyes as I glanced
      round me. There were two occupants of the room—one, Mrs. Hudson,
      who beamed upon us both as we entered—the other, the strange
      dummy which had played so important a part in the evening’s
      adventures. It was a wax-coloured model of my friend, so
      admirably done that it was a perfect facsimile. It stood on a
      small pedestal table with an old dressing-gown of Holmes’s so
      draped round it that the illusion from the street was absolutely
      perfect.

      “I hope you observed all precautions, Mrs. Hudson?” said Holmes.

      “I went to it on my knees, sir, just as you told me.”

      “Excellent. You carried the thing out very well. Did you observe
      where the bullet went?”

      “Yes, sir. I’m afraid it has spoilt your beautiful bust, for it
      passed right through the head and flattened itself on the wall. I
      picked it up from the carpet. Here it is!”

      Holmes held it out to me. “A soft revolver bullet, as you
      perceive, Watson. There’s genius in that, for who would expect to
      find such a thing fired from an airgun? All right, Mrs. Hudson. I
      am much obliged for your assistance. And now, Watson, let me see
      you in your old seat once more, for there are several points
      which I should like to discuss with you.”

      He had thrown off the seedy frockcoat, and now he was the Holmes
      of old in the mouse-coloured dressing-gown which he took from his
      effigy.

      “The old _shikari’s_ nerves have not lost their steadiness, nor
      his eyes their keenness,” said he, with a laugh, as he inspected
      the shattered forehead of his bust.

      “Plumb in the middle of the back of the head and smack through
      the brain. He was the best shot in India, and I expect that there
      are few better in London. Have you heard the name?”

      “No, I have not.”

      “Well, well, such is fame! But, then, if I remember right, you
      had not heard the name of Professor James Moriarty, who had one
      of the great brains of the century. Just give me down my index of
      biographies from the shelf.”

      He turned over the pages lazily, leaning back in his chair and
      blowing great clouds from his cigar.

      “My collection of M’s is a fine one,” said he. “Moriarty himself
      is enough to make any letter illustrious, and here is Morgan the
      poisoner, and Merridew of abominable memory, and Mathews, who
      knocked out my left canine in the waiting-room at Charing Cross,
      and, finally, here is our friend of to-night.”

      He handed over the book, and I read:

      _Moran_, _Sebastian_, _Colonel_. Unemployed. Formerly 1st
      Bangalore Pioneers. Born London, 1840. Son of Sir Augustus Moran,
      C.B., once British Minister to Persia. Educated Eton and Oxford.
      Served in Jowaki Campaign, Afghan Campaign, Charasiab
      (despatches), Sherpur, and Cabul. Author of _Heavy Game of the
      Western Himalayas_ (1881); _Three Months in the Jungle_ (1884).
      Address: Conduit Street. Clubs: The Anglo-Indian, the
      Tankerville, the Bagatelle Card Club.

      On the margin was written, in Holmes’s precise hand:

      The second most dangerous man in London.

      “This is astonishing,” said I, as I handed back the volume. “The
      man’s career is that of an honourable soldier.”

      “It is true,” Holmes answered. “Up to a certain point he did
      well. He was always a man of iron nerve, and the story is still
      told in India how he crawled down a drain after a wounded
      man-eating tiger. There are some trees, Watson, which grow to a
      certain height, and then suddenly develop some unsightly
      eccentricity. You will see it often in humans. I have a theory
      that the individual represents in his development the whole
      procession of his ancestors, and that such a sudden turn to good
      or evil stands for some strong influence which came into the line
      of his pedigree. The person becomes, as it were, the epitome of
      the history of his own family.”

      “It is surely rather fanciful.”

      “Well, I don’t insist upon it. Whatever the cause, Colonel Moran
      began to go wrong. Without any open scandal, he still made India
      too hot to hold him. He retired, came to London, and again
      acquired an evil name. It was at this time that he was sought out
      by Professor Moriarty, to whom for a time he was chief of the
      staff. Moriarty supplied him liberally with money, and used him
      only in one or two very high-class jobs, which no ordinary
      criminal could have undertaken. You may have some recollection of
      the death of Mrs. Stewart, of Lauder, in 1887. Not? Well, I am
      sure Moran was at the bottom of it, but nothing could be proved.
      So cleverly was the colonel concealed that, even when the
      Moriarty gang was broken up, we could not incriminate him. You
      remember at that date, when I called upon you in your rooms, how
      I put up the shutters for fear of air-guns? No doubt you thought
      me fanciful. I knew exactly what I was doing, for I knew of the
      existence of this remarkable gun, and I knew also that one of the
      best shots in the world would be behind it. When we were in
      Switzerland he followed us with Moriarty, and it was undoubtedly
      he who gave me that evil five minutes on the Reichenbach ledge.

      “You may think that I read the papers with some attention during
      my sojourn in France, on the look-out for any chance of laying
      him by the heels. So long as he was free in London, my life would
      really not have been worth living. Night and day the shadow would
      have been over me, and sooner or later his chance must have come.
      What could I do? I could not shoot him at sight, or I should
      myself be in the dock. There was no use appealing to a
      magistrate. They cannot interfere on the strength of what would
      appear to them to be a wild suspicion. So I could do nothing. But
      I watched the criminal news, knowing that sooner or later I
      should get him. Then came the death of this Ronald Adair. My
      chance had come at last. Knowing what I did, was it not certain
      that Colonel Moran had done it? He had played cards with the lad,
      he had followed him home from the club, he had shot him through
      the open window. There was not a doubt of it. The bullets alone
      are enough to put his head in a noose. I came over at once. I was
      seen by the sentinel, who would, I knew, direct the colonel’s
      attention to my presence. He could not fail to connect my sudden
      return with his crime, and to be terribly alarmed. I was sure
      that he would make an attempt to get me out of the way _at once_,
      and would bring round his murderous weapon for that purpose. I
      left him an excellent mark in the window, and, having warned the
      police that they might be needed—by the way, Watson, you spotted
      their presence in that doorway with unerring accuracy—I took up
      what seemed to me to be a judicious post for observation, never
      dreaming that he would choose the same spot for his attack. Now,
      my dear Watson, does anything remain for me to explain?”

      “Yes,” said I. “You have not made it clear what was Colonel
      Moran’s motive in murdering the Honourable Ronald Adair?”

      “Ah! my dear Watson, there we come into those realms of
      conjecture, where the most logical mind may be at fault. Each may
      form his own hypothesis upon the present evidence, and yours is
      as likely to be correct as mine.”

      “You have formed one, then?”

      “I think that it is not difficult to explain the facts. It came
      out in evidence that Colonel Moran and young Adair had, between
      them, won a considerable amount of money. Now, Moran undoubtedly
      played foul—of that I have long been aware. I believe that on the
      day of the murder Adair had discovered that Moran was cheating.
      Very likely he had spoken to him privately, and had threatened to
      expose him unless he voluntarily resigned his membership of the
      club, and promised not to play cards again. It is unlikely that a
      youngster like Adair would at once make a hideous scandal by
      exposing a well-known man so much older than himself. Probably he
      acted as I suggest. The exclusion from his clubs would mean ruin
      to Moran, who lived by his ill-gotten card-gains. He therefore
      murdered Adair, who at the time was endeavouring to work out how
      much money he should himself return, since he could not profit by
      his partner’s foul play. He locked the door lest the ladies
      should surprise him and insist upon knowing what he was doing
      with these names and coins. Will it pass?”

      “I have no doubt that you have hit upon the truth.”

      “It will be verified or disproved at the trial. Meanwhile, come
      what may, Colonel Moran will trouble us no more. The famous
      air-gun of Von Herder will embellish the Scotland Yard Museum,
      and once again Mr. Sherlock Holmes is free to devote his life to
      examining those interesting little problems which the complex
      life of London so plentifully presents.”




THE ADVENTURE OF THE NORWOOD BUILDER


      “From the point of view of the criminal expert,” said Mr.
      Sherlock Holmes, “London has become a singularly uninteresting
      city since the death of the late lamented Professor Moriarty.”

      “I can hardly think that you would find many decent citizens to
      agree with you,” I answered.

      “Well, well, I must not be selfish,” said he, with a smile, as he
      pushed back his chair from the breakfast-table. “The community is
      certainly the gainer, and no one the loser, save the poor
      out-of-work specialist, whose occupation has gone. With that man
      in the field, one’s morning paper presented infinite
      possibilities. Often it was only the smallest trace, Watson, the
      faintest indication, and yet it was enough to tell me that the
      great malignant brain was there, as the gentlest tremors of the
      edges of the web remind one of the foul spider which lurks in the
      centre. Petty thefts, wanton assaults, purposeless outrage—to the
      man who held the clue all could be worked into one connected
      whole. To the scientific student of the higher criminal world, no
      capital in Europe offered the advantages which London then
      possessed. But now——” He shrugged his shoulders in humorous
      deprecation of the state of things which he had himself done so
      much to produce.

      At the time of which I speak, Holmes had been back for some
      months, and I at his request had sold my practice and returned to
      share the old quarters in Baker Street. A young doctor, named
      Verner, had purchased my small Kensington practice, and given
      with astonishingly little demur the highest price that I ventured
      to ask—an incident which only explained itself some years later,
      when I found that Verner was a distant relation of Holmes, and
      that it was my friend who had really found the money.

      Our months of partnership had not been so uneventful as he had
      stated, for I find, on looking over my notes, that this period
      includes the case of the papers of ex-President Murillo, and also
      the shocking affair of the Dutch steamship _Friesland_, which so
      nearly cost us both our lives. His cold and proud nature was
      always averse, however, from anything in the shape of public
      applause, and he bound me in the most stringent terms to say no
      further word of himself, his methods, or his successes—a
      prohibition which, as I have explained, has only now been
      removed.

      Mr. Sherlock Holmes was leaning back in his chair after his
      whimsical protest, and was unfolding his morning paper in a
      leisurely fashion, when our attention was arrested by a
      tremendous ring at the bell, followed immediately by a hollow
      drumming sound, as if someone were beating on the outer door with
      his fist. As it opened there came a tumultuous rush into the
      hall, rapid feet clattered up the stair, and an instant later a
      wild-eyed and frantic young man, pale, disheveled, and
      palpitating, burst into the room. He looked from one to the other
      of us, and under our gaze of inquiry he became conscious that
      some apology was needed for this unceremonious entry.

      “I’m sorry, Mr. Holmes,” he cried. “You mustn’t blame me. I am
      nearly mad. Mr. Holmes, I am the unhappy John Hector McFarlane.”

      He made the announcement as if the name alone would explain both
      his visit and its manner, but I could see, by my companion’s
      unresponsive face, that it meant no more to him than to me.

      “Have a cigarette, Mr. McFarlane,” said he, pushing his case
      across. “I am sure that, with your symptoms, my friend Dr. Watson
      here would prescribe a sedative. The weather has been so very
      warm these last few days. Now, if you feel a little more
      composed, I should be glad if you would sit down in that chair,
      and tell us very slowly and quietly who you are, and what it is
      that you want. You mentioned your name, as if I should recognize
      it, but I assure you that, beyond the obvious facts that you are
      a bachelor, a solicitor, a Freemason, and an asthmatic, I know
      nothing whatever about you.”

      Familiar as I was with my friend’s methods, it was not difficult
      for me to follow his deductions, and to observe the untidiness of
      attire, the sheaf of legal papers, the watch-charm, and the
      breathing which had prompted them. Our client, however, stared in
      amazement.

      “Yes, I am all that, Mr. Holmes; and, in addition, I am the most
      unfortunate man at this moment in London. For heaven’s sake,
      don’t abandon me, Mr. Holmes! If they come to arrest me before I
      have finished my story, make them give me time, so that I may
      tell you the whole truth. I could go to jail happy if I knew that
      you were working for me outside.”

      “Arrest you!” said Holmes. “This is really most grati—most
      interesting. On what charge do you expect to be arrested?”

      “Upon the charge of murdering Mr. Jonas Oldacre, of Lower
      Norwood.”

      My companion’s expressive face showed a sympathy which was not, I
      am afraid, entirely unmixed with satisfaction.

      “Dear me,” said he, “it was only this moment at breakfast that I
      was saying to my friend, Dr. Watson, that sensational cases had
      disappeared out of our papers.”

      Our visitor stretched forward a quivering hand and picked up the
      _Daily Telegraph_, which still lay upon Holmes’s knee.

      “If you had looked at it, sir, you would have seen at a glance
      what the errand is on which I have come to you this morning. I
      feel as if my name and my misfortune must be in every man’s
      mouth.” He turned it over to expose the central page. “Here it
      is, and with your permission I will read it to you. Listen to
      this, Mr. Holmes. The headlines are: ‘Mysterious Affair at Lower
      Norwood. Disappearance of a Well-known Builder. Suspicion of
      Murder and Arson. A Clue to the Criminal.’ That is the clue which
      they are already following, Mr. Holmes, and I know that it leads
      infallibly to me. I have been followed from London Bridge
      Station, and I am sure that they are only waiting for the warrant
      to arrest me. It will break my mother’s heart—it will break her
      heart!” He wrung his hands in an agony of apprehension, and
      swayed backward and forward in his chair.

      I looked with interest upon this man, who was accused of being
      the perpetrator of a crime of violence. He was flaxen-haired and
      handsome, in a washed-out negative fashion, with frightened blue
      eyes, and a clean-shaven face, with a weak, sensitive mouth. His
      age may have been about twenty-seven, his dress and bearing that
      of a gentleman. From the pocket of his light summer overcoat
      protruded the bundle of indorsed papers which proclaimed his
      profession.

      “We must use what time we have,” said Holmes. “Watson, would you
      have the kindness to take the paper and to read the paragraph in
      question?”

      Underneath the vigorous headlines which our client had quoted, I
      read the following suggestive narrative:

      “Late last night, or early this morning, an incident occurred at
      Lower Norwood which points, it is feared, to a serious crime. Mr.
      Jonas Oldacre is a well-known resident of that suburb, where he
      has carried on his business as a builder for many years. Mr.
      Oldacre is a bachelor, fifty-two years of age, and lives in Deep
      Dene House, at the Sydenham end of the road of that name. He has
      had the reputation of being a man of eccentric habits, secretive
      and retiring. For some years he has practically withdrawn from
      the business, in which he is said to have massed considerable
      wealth. A small timber-yard still exists, however, at the back of
      the house, and last night, about twelve o’clock, an alarm was
      given that one of the stacks was on fire. The engines were soon
      upon the spot, but the dry wood burned with great fury, and it
      was impossible to arrest the conflagration until the stack had
      been entirely consumed. Up to this point the incident bore the
      appearance of an ordinary accident, but fresh indications seem to
      point to serious crime. Surprise was expressed at the absence of
      the master of the establishment from the scene of the fire, and
      an inquiry followed, which showed that he had disappeared from
      the house. An examination of his room revealed that the bed had
      not been slept in, that a safe which stood in it was open, that a
      number of important papers were scattered about the room, and
      finally, that there were signs of a murderous struggle, slight
      traces of blood being found within the room, and an oaken
      walking-stick, which also showed stains of blood upon the handle.
      It is known that Mr. Jonas Oldacre had received a late visitor in
      his bedroom upon that night, and the stick found has been
      identified as the property of this person, who is a young London
      solicitor named John Hector McFarlane, junior partner of Graham
      and McFarlane, of 426, Gresham Buildings, E.C. The police believe
      that they have evidence in their possession which supplies a very
      convincing motive for the crime, and altogether it cannot be
      doubted that sensational developments will follow.
          “LATER.—It is rumoured as we go to press that Mr. John Hector
          McFarlane has actually been arrested on the charge of the
          murder of Mr. Jonas Oldacre. It is at least certain that a
          warrant has been issued. There have been further and sinister
          developments in the investigation at Norwood. Besides the
          signs of a struggle in the room of the unfortunate builder it
          is now known that the French windows of his bedroom (which is
          on the ground floor) were found to be open, that there were
          marks as if some bulky object had been dragged across to the
          wood-pile, and, finally, it is asserted that charred remains
          have been found among the charcoal ashes of the fire. The
          police theory is that a most sensational crime has been
          committed, that the victim was clubbed to death in his own
          bedroom, his papers rifled, and his dead body dragged across
          to the wood-stack, which was then ignited so as to hide all
          traces of the crime. The conduct of the criminal
          investigation has been left in the experienced hands of
          Inspector Lestrade, of Scotland Yard, who is following up the
          clues with his accustomed energy and sagacity.”

      Sherlock Holmes listened with closed eyes and fingertips together
      to this remarkable account.

      “The case has certainly some points of interest,” said he, in his
      languid fashion. “May I ask, in the first place, Mr. McFarlane,
      how it is that you are still at liberty, since there appears to
      be enough evidence to justify your arrest?”

      “I live at Torrington Lodge, Blackheath, with my parents, Mr.
      Holmes, but last night, having to do business very late with Mr.
      Jonas Oldacre, I stayed at an hotel in Norwood, and came to my
      business from there. I knew nothing of this affair until I was in
      the train, when I read what you have just heard. I at once saw
      the horrible danger of my position, and I hurried to put the case
      into your hands. I have no doubt that I should have been arrested
      either at my city office or at my home. A man followed me from
      London Bridge Station, and I have no doubt—Great heaven! what is
      that?”

      It was a clang of the bell, followed instantly by heavy steps
      upon the stair. A moment later, our old friend Lestrade appeared
      in the doorway. Over his shoulder I caught a glimpse of one or
      two uniformed policemen outside.

      “Mr. John Hector McFarlane?” said Lestrade.

      Our unfortunate client rose with a ghastly face.

      “I arrest you for the wilful murder of Mr. Jonas Oldacre, of
      Lower Norwood.”

      McFarlane turned to us with a gesture of despair, and sank into
      his chair once more like one who is crushed.

      “One moment, Lestrade,” said Holmes. “Half an hour more or less
      can make no difference to you, and the gentleman was about to
      give us an account of this very interesting affair, which might
      aid us in clearing it up.”

      “I think there will be no difficulty in clearing it up,” said
      Lestrade, grimly.

      “None the less, with your permission, I should be much interested
      to hear his account.”

      “Well, Mr. Holmes, it is difficult for me to refuse you anything,
      for you have been of use to the force once or twice in the past,
      and we owe you a good turn at Scotland Yard,” said Lestrade. “At
      the same time I must remain with my prisoner, and I am bound to
      warn him that anything he may say will appear in evidence against
      him.”

      “I wish nothing better,” said our client. “All I ask is that you
      should hear and recognize the absolute truth.”

      Lestrade looked at his watch. “I’ll give you half an hour,” said
      he.

      “I must explain first,” said McFarlane, “that I knew nothing of
      Mr. Jonas Oldacre. His name was familiar to me, for many years
      ago my parents were acquainted with him, but they drifted apart.
      I was very much surprised therefore, when yesterday, about three
      o’clock in the afternoon, he walked into my office in the city.
      But I was still more astonished when he told me the object of his
      visit. He had in his hand several sheets of a notebook, covered
      with scribbled writing—here they are—and he laid them on my
      table.

      “‘Here is my will,’ said he. ‘I want you, Mr. McFarlane, to cast
      it into proper legal shape. I will sit here while you do so.’

      “I set myself to copy it, and you can imagine my astonishment
      when I found that, with some reservations, he had left all his
      property to me. He was a strange little ferret-like man, with
      white eyelashes, and when I looked up at him I found his keen
      grey eyes fixed upon me with an amused expression. I could hardly
      believe my own as I read the terms of the will; but he explained
      that he was a bachelor with hardly any living relation, that he
      had known my parents in his youth, and that he had always heard
      of me as a very deserving young man, and was assured that his
      money would be in worthy hands. Of course, I could only stammer
      out my thanks. The will was duly finished, signed, and witnessed
      by my clerk. This is it on the blue paper, and these slips, as I
      have explained, are the rough draft. Mr. Jonas Oldacre then
      informed me that there were a number of documents—building
      leases, title-deeds, mortgages, scrip, and so forth—which it was
      necessary that I should see and understand. He said that his mind
      would not be easy until the whole thing was settled, and he
      begged me to come out to his house at Norwood that night,
      bringing the will with me, and to arrange matters. ‘Remember, my
      boy, not one word to your parents about the affair until
      everything is settled. We will keep it as a little surprise for
      them.’ He was very insistent upon this point, and made me promise
      it faithfully.

      “You can imagine, Mr. Holmes, that I was not in a humour to
      refuse him anything that he might ask. He was my benefactor, and
      all my desire was to carry out his wishes in every particular. I
      sent a telegram home, therefore, to say that I had important
      business on hand, and that it was impossible for me to say how
      late I might be. Mr. Oldacre had told me that he would like me to
      have supper with him at nine, as he might not be home before that
      hour. I had some difficulty in finding his house, however, and it
      was nearly half-past before I reached it. I found him——”

      “One moment!” said Holmes. “Who opened the door?”

      “A middle-aged woman, who was, I suppose, his housekeeper.”

      “And it was she, I presume, who mentioned your name?”

      “Exactly,” said McFarlane.

      “Pray proceed.”

      McFarlane wiped his damp brow, and then continued his narrative:

      “I was shown by this woman into a sitting-room, where a frugal
      supper was laid out. Afterwards, Mr. Jonas Oldacre led me into
      his bedroom, in which there stood a heavy safe. This he opened
      and took out a mass of documents, which we went over together. It
      was between eleven and twelve when we finished. He remarked that
      we must not disturb the housekeeper. He showed me out through his
      own French window, which had been open all this time.”

      “Was the blind down?” asked Holmes.

      “I will not be sure, but I believe that it was only half down.
      Yes, I remember how he pulled it up in order to swing open the
      window. I could not find my stick, and he said, ‘Never mind, my
      boy, I shall see a good deal of you now, I hope, and I will keep
      your stick until you come back to claim it.’ I left him there,
      the safe open, and the papers made up in packets upon the table.
      It was so late that I could not get back to Blackheath, so I
      spent the night at the Anerley Arms, and I knew nothing more
      until I read of this horrible affair in the morning.”

      “Anything more that you would like to ask, Mr. Holmes?” said
      Lestrade, whose eyebrows had gone up once or twice during this
      remarkable explanation.

      “Not until I have been to Blackheath.”

      “You mean to Norwood,” said Lestrade.

      “Oh, yes, no doubt that is what I must have meant,” said Holmes,
      with his enigmatical smile. Lestrade had learned by more
      experiences than he would care to acknowledge that that brain
      could cut through that which was impenetrable to him. I saw him
      look curiously at my companion.

      “I think I should like to have a word with you presently, Mr.
      Sherlock Holmes,” said he. “Now, Mr. McFarlane, two of my
      constables are at the door, and there is a four-wheeler waiting.”
      The wretched young man arose, and with a last beseeching glance
      at us walked from the room. The officers conducted him to the
      cab, but Lestrade remained.

      Holmes had picked up the pages which formed the rough draft of
      the will, and was looking at them with the keenest interest upon
      his face.

      “There are some points about that document, Lestrade, are there
      not?” said he, pushing them over.

      The official looked at them with a puzzled expression.

      “I can read the first few lines and these in the middle of the
      second page, and one or two at the end. Those are as clear as
      print,” said he, “but the writing in between is very bad, and
      there are three places where I cannot read it at all.”

      “What do you make of that?” said Holmes.

      “Well, what do _you_ make of it?”

      “That it was written in a train. The good writing represents
      stations, the bad writing movement, and the very bad writing
      passing over points. A scientific expert would pronounce at once
      that this was drawn up on a suburban line, since nowhere save in
      the immediate vicinity of a great city could there be so quick a
      succession of points. Granting that his whole journey was
      occupied in drawing up the will, then the train was an express,
      only stopping once between Norwood and London Bridge.”

      Lestrade began to laugh.

      “You are too many for me when you begin to get on your theories,
      Mr. Holmes,” said he. “How does this bear on the case?”

      “Well, it corroborates the young man’s story to the extent that
      the will was drawn up by Jonas Oldacre in his journey yesterday.
      It is curious—is it not?—that a man should draw up so important a
      document in so haphazard a fashion. It suggests that he did not
      think it was going to be of much practical importance. If a man
      drew up a will which he did not intend ever to be effective, he
      might do it so.”

      “Well, he drew up his own death warrant at the same time,” said
      Lestrade.

      “Oh, you think so?”

      “Don’t you?”

      “Well, it is quite possible, but the case is not clear to me
      yet.”

      “Not clear? Well, if that isn’t clear, what _could_ be clearer?
      Here is a young man who learns suddenly that, if a certain older
      man dies, he will succeed to a fortune. What does he do? He says
      nothing to anyone, but he arranges that he shall go out on some
      pretext to see his client that night. He waits until the only
      other person in the house is in bed, and then in the solitude of
      a man’s room he murders him, burns his body in the wood-pile, and
      departs to a neighbouring hotel. The blood-stains in the room and
      also on the stick are very slight. It is probable that he
      imagined his crime to be a bloodless one, and hoped that if the
      body were consumed it would hide all traces of the method of his
      death—traces which, for some reason, must have pointed to him. Is
      not all this obvious?”

      “It strikes me, my good Lestrade, as being just a trifle too
      obvious,” said Holmes. “You do not add imagination to your other
      great qualities, but if you could for one moment put yourself in
      the place of this young man, would you choose the very night
      after the will had been made to commit your crime? Would it not
      seem dangerous to you to make so very close a relation between
      the two incidents? Again, would you choose an occasion when you
      are known to be in the house, when a servant has let you in? And,
      finally, would you take the great pains to conceal the body, and
      yet leave your own stick as a sign that you were the criminal?
      Confess, Lestrade, that all this is very unlikely.”

      “As to the stick, Mr. Holmes, you know as well as I do that a
      criminal is often flurried, and does such things, which a cool
      man would avoid. He was very likely afraid to go back to the
      room. Give me another theory that would fit the facts.”

      “I could very easily give you half a dozen,” said Holmes. “Here
      for example, is a very possible and even probable one. I make you
      a free present of it. The older man is showing documents which
      are of evident value. A passing tramp sees them through the
      window, the blind of which is only half down. Exit the solicitor.
      Enter the tramp! He seizes a stick, which he observes there,
      kills Oldacre, and departs after burning the body.”

      “Why should the tramp burn the body?”

      “For the matter of that, why should McFarlane?”

      “To hide some evidence.”

      “Possibly the tramp wanted to hide that any murder at all had
      been committed.”

      “And why did the tramp take nothing?”

      “Because they were papers that he could not negotiate.”

      Lestrade shook his head, though it seemed to me that his manner
      was less absolutely assured than before.

      “Well, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, you may look for your tramp, and
      while you are finding him we will hold on to our man. The future
      will show which is right. Just notice this point, Mr. Holmes:
      that so far as we know, none of the papers were removed, and that
      the prisoner is the one man in the world who had no reason for
      removing them, since he was heir-at-law, and would come into them
      in any case.”

      My friend seemed struck by this remark.

      “I don’t mean to deny that the evidence is in some ways very
      strongly in favour of your theory,” said he. “I only wish to
      point out that there are other theories possible. As you say, the
      future will decide. Good-morning! I dare say that in the course
      of the day I shall drop in at Norwood and see how you are getting
      on.”

      When the detective departed, my friend rose and made his
      preparations for the day’s work with the alert air of a man who
      has a congenial task before him.

      “My first movement Watson,” said he, as he bustled into his
      frockcoat, “must, as I said, be in the direction of Blackheath.”

      “And why not Norwood?”

      “Because we have in this case one singular incident coming close
      to the heels of another singular incident. The police are making
      the mistake of concentrating their attention upon the second,
      because it happens to be the one which is actually criminal. But
      it is evident to me that the logical way to approach the case is
      to begin by trying to throw some light upon the first
      incident—the curious will, so suddenly made, and to so unexpected
      an heir. It may do something to simplify what followed. No, my
      dear fellow, I don’t think you can help me. There is no prospect
      of danger, or I should not dream of stirring out without you. I
      trust that when I see you in the evening, I will be able to
      report that I have been able to do something for this unfortunate
      youngster, who has thrown himself upon my protection.”

      It was late when my friend returned, and I could see, by a glance
      at his haggard and anxious face, that the high hopes with which
      he had started had not been fulfilled. For an hour he droned away
      upon his violin, endeavouring to soothe his own ruffled spirits.
      At last he flung down the instrument, and plunged into a detailed
      account of his misadventures.

      “It’s all going wrong, Watson—all as wrong as it can go. I kept a
      bold face before Lestrade, but, upon my soul, I believe that for
      once the fellow is on the right track and we are on the wrong.
      All my instincts are one way, and all the facts are the other,
      and I much fear that British juries have not yet attained that
      pitch of intelligence when they will give the preference to my
      theories over Lestrade’s facts.”

      “Did you go to Blackheath?”

      “Yes, Watson, I went there, and I found very quickly that the
      late lamented Oldacre was a pretty considerable blackguard. The
      father was away in search of his son. The mother was at home—a
      little, fluffy, blue-eyed person, in a tremor of fear and
      indignation. Of course, she would not admit even the possibility
      of his guilt. But she would not express either surprise or regret
      over the fate of Oldacre. On the contrary, she spoke of him with
      such bitterness that she was unconsciously considerably
      strengthening the case of the police for, of course, if her son
      had heard her speak of the man in this fashion, it would
      predispose him towards hatred and violence. ‘He was more like a
      malignant and cunning ape than a human being,’ said she, ‘and he
      always was, ever since he was a young man.’

      “‘You knew him at that time?’ said I.

      “‘Yes, I knew him well, in fact, he was an old suitor of mine.
      Thank heaven that I had the sense to turn away from him and to
      marry a better, if poorer, man. I was engaged to him, Mr. Holmes,
      when I heard a shocking story of how he had turned a cat loose in
      an aviary, and I was so horrified at his brutal cruelty that I
      would have nothing more to do with him.’ She rummaged in a
      bureau, and presently she produced a photograph of a woman,
      shamefully defaced and mutilated with a knife. ‘That is my own
      photograph,’ she said. ‘He sent it to me in that state, with his
      curse, upon my wedding morning.’

      “‘Well,’ said I, ‘at least he has forgiven you now, since he has
      left all his property to your son.’

      “‘Neither my son nor I want anything from Jonas Oldacre, dead or
      alive!’ she cried, with a proper spirit. ‘There is a God in
      heaven, Mr. Holmes, and that same God who has punished that
      wicked man will show, in His own good time, that my son’s hands
      are guiltless of his blood.’

      “Well, I tried one or two leads, but could get at nothing which
      would help our hypothesis, and several points which would make
      against it. I gave it up at last and off I went to Norwood.

      “This place, Deep Dene House, is a big modern villa of staring
      brick, standing back in its own grounds, with a laurel-clumped
      lawn in front of it. To the right and some distance back from the
      road was the timber-yard which had been the scene of the fire.
      Here’s a rough plan on a leaf of my notebook. This window on the
      left is the one which opens into Oldacre’s room. You can look
      into it from the road, you see. That is about the only bit of
      consolation I have had to-day. Lestrade was not there, but his
      head constable did the honours. They had just found a great
      treasure-trove. They had spent the morning raking among the ashes
      of the burned wood-pile, and besides the charred organic remains
      they had secured several discoloured metal discs. I examined them
      with care, and there was no doubt that they were trouser buttons.
      I even distinguished that one of them was marked with the name of
      ‘Hyams,’ who was Oldacres tailor. I then worked the lawn very
      carefully for signs and traces, but this drought has made
      everything as hard as iron. Nothing was to be seen save that some
      body or bundle had been dragged through a low privet hedge which
      is in a line with the wood-pile. All that, of course, fits in
      with the official theory. I crawled about the lawn with an August
      sun on my back, but I got up at the end of an hour no wiser than
      before.

      “Well, after this fiasco I went into the bedroom and examined
      that also. The blood-stains were very slight, mere smears and
      discolourations, but undoubtedly fresh. The stick had been
      removed, but there also the marks were slight. There is no doubt
      about the stick belonging to our client. He admits it. Footmarks
      of both men could be made out on the carpet, but none of any
      third person, which again is a trick for the other side. They
      were piling up their score all the time and we were at a
      standstill.

      “Only one little gleam of hope did I get—and yet it amounted to
      nothing. I examined the contents of the safe, most of which had
      been taken out and left on the table. The papers had been made up
      into sealed envelopes, one or two of which had been opened by the
      police. They were not, so far as I could judge, of any great
      value, nor did the bank-book show that Mr. Oldacre was in such
      very affluent circumstances. But it seemed to me that all the
      papers were not there. There were allusions to some
      deeds—possibly the more valuable—which I could not find. This, of
      course, if we could definitely prove it, would turn Lestrade’s
      argument against himself, for who would steal a thing if he knew
      that he would shortly inherit it?

      “Finally, having drawn every other cover and picked up no scent,
      I tried my luck with the housekeeper. Mrs. Lexington is her
      name—a little, dark, silent person, with suspicious and sidelong
      eyes. She could tell us something if she would—I am convinced of
      it. But she was as close as wax. Yes, she had let Mr. McFarlane
      in at half-past nine. She wished her hand had withered before she
      had done so. She had gone to bed at half-past ten. Her room was
      at the other end of the house, and she could hear nothing of what
      had passed. Mr. McFarlane had left his hat, and to the best of
      her belief his stick, in the hall. She had been awakened by the
      alarm of fire. Her poor, dear master had certainly been murdered.
      Had he any enemies? Well, every man had enemies, but Mr. Oldacre
      kept himself very much to himself, and only met people in the way
      of business. She had seen the buttons, and was sure that they
      belonged to the clothes which he had worn last night. The
      wood-pile was very dry, for it had not rained for a month. It
      burned like tinder, and by the time she reached the spot, nothing
      could be seen but flames. She and all the firemen smelled the
      burned flesh from inside it. She knew nothing of the papers, nor
      of Mr. Oldacre’s private affairs.

      “So, my dear Watson, there’s my report of a failure. And yet—and
      yet—” he clenched his thin hands in a paroxysm of conviction—“I
      _know_ it’s all wrong. I feel it in my bones. There is something
      that has not come out, and that housekeeper knows it. There was a
      sort of sulky defiance in her eyes, which only goes with guilty
      knowledge. However, there’s no good talking any more about it,
      Watson; but unless some lucky chance comes our way I fear that
      the Norwood Disappearance Case will not figure in that chronicle
      of our successes which I foresee that a patient public will
      sooner or later have to endure.”

      “Surely,” said I, “the man’s appearance would go far with any
      jury?”

      “That is a dangerous argument my dear Watson. You remember that
      terrible murderer, Bert Stevens, who wanted us to get him off in
      ’87? Was there ever a more mild-mannered, Sunday-school young
      man?”

      “It is true.”

      “Unless we succeed in establishing an alternative theory, this
      man is lost. You can hardly find a flaw in the case which can now
      be presented against him, and all further investigation has
      served to strengthen it. By the way, there is one curious little
      point about those papers which may serve us as the starting-point
      for an inquiry. On looking over the bank-book I found that the
      low state of the balance was principally due to large checks
      which have been made out during the last year to Mr. Cornelius. I
      confess that I should be interested to know who this Mr.
      Cornelius may be with whom a retired builder has such very large
      transactions. Is it possible that he has had a hand in the
      affair? Cornelius might be a broker, but we have found no scrip
      to correspond with these large payments. Failing any other
      indication, my researches must now take the direction of an
      inquiry at the bank for the gentleman who has cashed these
      checks. But I fear, my dear fellow, that our case will end
      ingloriously by Lestrade hanging our client, which will certainly
      be a triumph for Scotland Yard.”

      I do not know how far Sherlock Holmes took any sleep that night,
      but when I came down to breakfast I found him pale and harassed,
      his bright eyes the brighter for the dark shadows round them. The
      carpet round his chair was littered with cigarette-ends and with
      the early editions of the morning papers. An open telegram lay
      upon the table.

      “What do you think of this, Watson?” he asked, tossing it across.

      It was from Norwood, and ran as follows:

      Important fresh evidence to hand. McFarlane’s guilt definitely
      established. Advise you to abandon case.—LESTRADE.

      “This sounds serious,” said I.

      “It is Lestrade’s little cock-a-doodle of victory,” Holmes
      answered, with a bitter smile. “And yet it may be premature to
      abandon the case. After all, important fresh evidence is a
      two-edged thing, and may possibly cut in a very different
      direction to that which Lestrade imagines. Take your breakfast,
      Watson, and we will go out together and see what we can do. I
      feel as if I shall need your company and your moral support
      today.”

      My friend had no breakfast himself, for it was one of his
      peculiarities that in his more intense moments he would permit
      himself no food, and I have known him presume upon his iron
      strength until he has fainted from pure inanition. “At present I
      cannot spare energy and nerve force for digestion,” he would say
      in answer to my medical remonstrances. I was not surprised,
      therefore, when this morning he left his untouched meal behind
      him, and started with me for Norwood. A crowd of morbid
      sightseers were still gathered round Deep Dene House, which was
      just such a suburban villa as I had pictured. Within the gates
      Lestrade met us, his face flushed with victory, his manner
      grossly triumphant.

      “Well, Mr. Holmes, have you proved us to be wrong yet? Have you
      found your tramp?” he cried.

      “I have formed no conclusion whatever,” my companion answered.

      “But we formed ours yesterday, and now it proves to be correct,
      so you must acknowledge that we have been a little in front of
      you this time, Mr. Holmes.”

      “You certainly have the air of something unusual having
      occurred,” said Holmes.

      Lestrade laughed loudly.

      “You don’t like being beaten any more than the rest of us do,”
      said he. “A man can’t expect always to have it his own way, can
      he, Dr. Watson? Step this way, if you please, gentlemen, and I
      think I can convince you once for all that it was John McFarlane
      who did this crime.”

      He led us through the passage and out into a dark hall beyond.

      “This is where young McFarlane must have come out to get his hat
      after the crime was done,” said he. “Now look at this.” With
      dramatic suddenness he struck a match, and by its light exposed a
      stain of blood upon the whitewashed wall. As he held the match
      nearer, I saw that it was more than a stain. It was the
      well-marked print of a thumb.

      “Look at that with your magnifying glass, Mr. Holmes.”

      “Yes, I am doing so.”

      “You are aware that no two thumb-marks are alike?”

      “I have heard something of the kind.”

      “Well, then, will you please compare that print with this wax
      impression of young McFarlane’s right thumb, taken by my orders
      this morning?”

      As he held the waxen print close to the blood-stain, it did not
      take a magnifying glass to see that the two were undoubtedly from
      the same thumb. It was evident to me that our unfortunate client
      was lost.

      “That is final,” said Lestrade.

      “Yes, that is final,” I involuntarily echoed.

      “It is final,” said Holmes.

      Something in his tone caught my ear, and I turned to look at him.
      An extraordinary change had come over his face. It was writhing
      with inward merriment. His two eyes were shining like stars. It
      seemed to me that he was making desperate efforts to restrain a
      convulsive attack of laughter.

      “Dear me! Dear me!” he said at last. “Well, now, who would have
      thought it? And how deceptive appearances may be, to be sure!
      Such a nice young man to look at! It is a lesson to us not to
      trust our own judgment, is it not, Lestrade?”

      “Yes, some of us are a little too much inclined to be cock-sure,
      Mr. Holmes,” said Lestrade. The man’s insolence was maddening,
      but we could not resent it.

      “What a providential thing that this young man should press his
      right thumb against the wall in taking his hat from the peg! Such
      a very natural action, too, if you come to think of it.” Holmes
      was outwardly calm, but his whole body gave a wriggle of
      suppressed excitement as he spoke.

      “By the way, Lestrade, who made this remarkable discovery?”

      “It was the housekeeper, Mrs. Lexington, who drew the night
      constable’s attention to it.”

      “Where was the night constable?”

      “He remained on guard in the bedroom where the crime was
      committed, so as to see that nothing was touched.”

      “But why didn’t the police see this mark yesterday?”

      “Well, we had no particular reason to make a careful examination
      of the hall. Besides, it’s not in a very prominent place, as you
      see.”

      “No, no—of course not. I suppose there is no doubt that the mark
      was there yesterday?”

      Lestrade looked at Holmes as if he thought he was going out of
      his mind. I confess that I was myself surprised both at his
      hilarious manner and at his rather wild observation.

      “I don’t know whether you think that McFarlane came out of jail
      in the dead of the night in order to strengthen the evidence
      against himself,” said Lestrade. “I leave it to any expert in the
      world whether that is not the mark of his thumb.”

      “It is unquestionably the mark of his thumb.”

      “There, that’s enough,” said Lestrade. “I am a practical man, Mr.
      Holmes, and when I have got my evidence I come to my conclusions.
      If you have anything to say, you will find me writing my report
      in the sitting-room.”

      Holmes had recovered his equanimity, though I still seemed to
      detect gleams of amusement in his expression.

      “Dear me, this is a very sad development, Watson, is it not?”
      said he. “And yet there are singular points about it which hold
      out some hopes for our client.”

      “I am delighted to hear it,” said I, heartily. “I was afraid it
      was all up with him.”

      “I would hardly go so far as to say that, my dear Watson. The
      fact is that there is one really serious flaw in this evidence to
      which our friend attaches so much importance.”

      “Indeed, Holmes! What is it?”

      “Only this: that I _know_ that that mark was not there when I
      examined the hall yesterday. And now, Watson, let us have a
      little stroll round in the sunshine.”

      With a confused brain, but with a heart into which some warmth of
      hope was returning, I accompanied my friend in a walk round the
      garden. Holmes took each face of the house in turn, and examined
      it with great interest. He then led the way inside, and went over
      the whole building from basement to attic. Most of the rooms were
      unfurnished, but none the less Holmes inspected them all
      minutely. Finally, on the top corridor, which ran outside three
      untenanted bedrooms, he again was seized with a spasm of
      merriment.

      “There are really some very unique features about this case,
      Watson,” said he. “I think it is time now that we took our friend
      Lestrade into our confidence. He has had his little smile at our
      expense, and perhaps we may do as much by him, if my reading of
      this problem proves to be correct. Yes, yes, I think I see how we
      should approach it.”

      The Scotland Yard inspector was still writing in the parlour when
      Holmes interrupted him.

      “I understood that you were writing a report of this case,” said
      he.

      “So I am.”

      “Don’t you think it may be a little premature? I can’t help
      thinking that your evidence is not complete.”

      Lestrade knew my friend too well to disregard his words. He laid
      down his pen and looked curiously at him.

      “What do you mean, Mr. Holmes?”

      “Only that there is an important witness whom you have not seen.”

      “Can you produce him?”

      “I think I can.”

      “Then do so.”

      “I will do my best. How many constables have you?”

      “There are three within call.”

      “Excellent!” said Holmes. “May I ask if they are all large,
      able-bodied men with powerful voices?”

      “I have no doubt they are, though I fail to see what their voices
      have to do with it.”

      “Perhaps I can help you to see that and one or two other things
      as well,” said Holmes. “Kindly summon your men, and I will try.”

      Five minutes later, three policemen had assembled in the hall.

      “In the outhouse you will find a considerable quantity of straw,”
      said Holmes. “I will ask you to carry in two bundles of it. I
      think it will be of the greatest assistance in producing the
      witness whom I require. Thank you very much. I believe you have
      some matches in your pocket Watson. Now, Mr. Lestrade, I will ask
      you all to accompany me to the top landing.”

      As I have said, there was a broad corridor there, which ran
      outside three empty bedrooms. At one end of the corridor we were
      all marshalled by Sherlock Holmes, the constables grinning and
      Lestrade staring at my friend with amazement, expectation, and
      derision chasing each other across his features. Holmes stood
      before us with the air of a conjurer who is performing a trick.

      “Would you kindly send one of your constables for two buckets of
      water? Put the straw on the floor here, free from the wall on
      either side. Now I think that we are all ready.”

      Lestrade’s face had begun to grow red and angry. “I don’t know
      whether you are playing a game with us, Mr. Sherlock Holmes,”
      said he. “If you know anything, you can surely say it without all
      this tomfoolery.”

      “I assure you, my good Lestrade, that I have an excellent reason
      for everything that I do. You may possibly remember that you
      chaffed me a little, some hours ago, when the sun seemed on your
      side of the hedge, so you must not grudge me a little pomp and
      ceremony now. Might I ask you, Watson, to open that window, and
      then to put a match to the edge of the straw?”

      I did so, and driven by the draught a coil of grey smoke swirled
      down the corridor, while the dry straw crackled and flamed.

      “Now we must see if we can find this witness for you, Lestrade.
      Might I ask you all to join in the cry of ‘Fire!’? Now then; one,
      two, three——”

      “Fire!” we all yelled.

      “Thank you. I will trouble you once again.”

      “Fire!”

      “Just once more, gentlemen, and all together.”

      “Fire!” The shout must have rung over Norwood.

      It had hardly died away when an amazing thing happened. A door
      suddenly flew open out of what appeared to be solid wall at the
      end of the corridor, and a little, wizened man darted out of it,
      like a rabbit out of its burrow.

      “Capital!” said Holmes, calmly. “Watson, a bucket of water over
      the straw. That will do! Lestrade, allow me to present you with
      your principal missing witness, Mr. Jonas Oldacre.”

      The detective stared at the newcomer with blank amazement. The
      latter was blinking in the bright light of the corridor, and
      peering at us and at the smouldering fire. It was an odious
      face—crafty, vicious, malignant, with shifty, light-grey eyes and
      white lashes.

      “What’s this, then?” said Lestrade, at last. “What have you been
      doing all this time, eh?”

      Oldacre gave an uneasy laugh, shrinking back from the furious red
      face of the angry detective.

      “I have done no harm.”

      “No harm? You have done your best to get an innocent man hanged.
      If it wasn’t for this gentleman here, I am not sure that you
      would not have succeeded.”

      The wretched creature began to whimper.

      “I am sure, sir, it was only my practical joke.”

      “Oh! a joke, was it? You won’t find the laugh on your side, I
      promise you. Take him down, and keep him in the sitting-room
      until I come. Mr. Holmes,” he continued, when they had gone, “I
      could not speak before the constables, but I don’t mind saying,
      in the presence of Dr. Watson, that this is the brightest thing
      that you have done yet, though it is a mystery to me how you did
      it. You have saved an innocent man’s life, and you have prevented
      a very grave scandal, which would have ruined my reputation in
      the Force.”

      Holmes smiled, and clapped Lestrade upon the shoulder.

      “Instead of being ruined, my good sir, you will find that your
      reputation has been enormously enhanced. Just make a few
      alterations in that report which you were writing, and they will
      understand how hard it is to throw dust in the eyes of Inspector
      Lestrade.”

      “And you don’t want your name to appear?”

      “Not at all. The work is its own reward. Perhaps I shall get the
      credit also at some distant day, when I permit my zealous
      historian to lay out his foolscap once more—eh, Watson? Well,
      now, let us see where this rat has been lurking.”

      A lath-and-plaster partition had been run across the passage six
      feet from the end, with a door cunningly concealed in it. It was
      lit within by slits under the eaves. A few articles of furniture
      and a supply of food and water were within, together with a
      number of books and papers.

      “There’s the advantage of being a builder,” said Holmes, as we
      came out. “He was able to fix up his own little hiding-place
      without any confederate—save, of course, that precious
      housekeeper of his, whom I should lose no time in adding to your
      bag, Lestrade.”

      “I’ll take your advice. But how did you know of this place, Mr.
      Holmes?”

      “I made up my mind that the fellow was in hiding in the house.
      When I paced one corridor and found it six feet shorter than the
      corresponding one below, it was pretty clear where he was. I
      thought he had not the nerve to lie quiet before an alarm of
      fire. We could, of course, have gone in and taken him, but it
      amused me to make him reveal himself. Besides, I owed you a
      little mystification, Lestrade, for your chaff in the morning.”

      “Well, sir, you certainly got equal with me on that. But how in
      the world did you know that he was in the house at all?”

      “The thumb-mark, Lestrade. You said it was final; and so it was,
      in a very different sense. I knew it had not been there the day
      before. I pay a good deal of attention to matters of detail, as
      you may have observed, and I had examined the hall, and was sure
      that the wall was clear. Therefore, it had been put on during the
      night.”

      “But how?”

      “Very simply. When those packets were sealed up, Jonas Oldacre
      got McFarlane to secure one of the seals by putting his thumb
      upon the soft wax. It would be done so quickly and so naturally,
      that I daresay the young man himself has no recollection of it.
      Very likely it just so happened, and Oldacre had himself no
      notion of the use he would put it to. Brooding over the case in
      that den of his, it suddenly struck him what absolutely damning
      evidence he could make against McFarlane by using that
      thumb-mark. It was the simplest thing in the world for him to
      take a wax impression from the seal, to moisten it in as much
      blood as he could get from a pin-prick, and to put the mark upon
      the wall during the night, either with his own hand or with that
      of his housekeeper. If you examine among those documents which he
      took with him into his retreat, I will lay you a wager that you
      find the seal with the thumb-mark upon it.”

      “Wonderful!” said Lestrade. “Wonderful! It’s all as clear as
      crystal, as you put it. But what is the object of this deep
      deception, Mr. Holmes?”

      It was amusing to me to see how the detective’s overbearing
      manner had changed suddenly to that of a child asking questions
      of its teacher.

      “Well, I don’t think that is very hard to explain. A very deep,
      malicious, vindictive person is the gentleman who is now waiting
      us downstairs. You know that he was once refused by McFarlane’s
      mother? You don’t! I told you that you should go to Blackheath
      first and Norwood afterwards. Well, this injury, as he would
      consider it, has rankled in his wicked, scheming brain, and all
      his life he has longed for vengeance, but never seen his chance.
      During the last year or two, things have gone against him—secret
      speculation, I think—and he finds himself in a bad way. He
      determines to swindle his creditors, and for this purpose he pays
      large checks to a certain Mr. Cornelius, who is, I imagine,
      himself under another name. I have not traced these checks yet,
      but I have no doubt that they were banked under that name at some
      provincial town where Oldacre from time to time led a double
      existence. He intended to change his name altogether, draw this
      money, and vanish, starting life again elsewhere.”

      “Well, that’s likely enough.”

      “It would strike him that in disappearing he might throw all
      pursuit off his track, and at the same time have an ample and
      crushing revenge upon his old sweetheart, if he could give the
      impression that he had been murdered by her only child. It was a
      masterpiece of villainy, and he carried it out like a master. The
      idea of the will, which would give an obvious motive for the
      crime, the secret visit unknown to his own parents, the retention
      of the stick, the blood, and the animal remains and buttons in
      the wood-pile, all were admirable. It was a net from which it
      seemed to me, a few hours ago, that there was no possible escape.
      But he had not that supreme gift of the artist, the knowledge of
      when to stop. He wished to improve that which was already
      perfect—to draw the rope tighter yet round the neck of his
      unfortunate victim—and so he ruined all. Let us descend,
      Lestrade. There are just one or two questions that I would ask
      him.”

      The malignant creature was seated in his own parlour, with a
      policeman upon each side of him.

      “It was a joke, my good sir—a practical joke, nothing more,” he
      whined incessantly. “I assure you, sir, that I simply concealed
      myself in order to see the effect of my disappearance, and I am
      sure that you would not be so unjust as to imagine that I would
      have allowed any harm to befall poor young Mr. McFarlane.”

      “That’s for a jury to decide,” said Lestrade. “Anyhow, we shall
      have you on a charge of conspiracy, if not for attempted murder.”

      “And you’ll probably find that your creditors will impound the
      banking account of Mr. Cornelius,” said Holmes.

      The little man started, and turned his malignant eyes upon my
      friend.

      “I have to thank you for a good deal,” said he. “Perhaps I’ll pay
      my debt some day.”

      Holmes smiled indulgently.

      “I fancy that, for some few years, you will find your time very
      fully occupied,” said he. “By the way, what was it you put into
      the wood-pile besides your old trousers? A dead dog, or rabbits,
      or what? You won’t tell? Dear me, how very unkind of you! Well,
      well, I daresay that a couple of rabbits would account both for
      the blood and for the charred ashes. If ever you write an
      account, Watson, you can make rabbits serve your turn.”




THE ADVENTURE OF THE DANCING MEN


      Holmes had been seated for some hours in silence with his long,
      thin back curved over a chemical vessel in which he was brewing a
      particularly malodorous product. His head was sunk upon his
      breast, and he looked from my point of view like a strange, lank
      bird, with dull grey plumage and a black top-knot.

      “So, Watson,” said he, suddenly, “you do not propose to invest in
      South African securities?”

      I gave a start of astonishment. Accustomed as I was to Holmes’s
      curious faculties, this sudden intrusion into my most intimate
      thoughts was utterly inexplicable.

      “How on earth do you know that?” I asked.

      He wheeled round upon his stool, with a steaming test-tube in his
      hand, and a gleam of amusement in his deep-set eyes.

      “Now, Watson, confess yourself utterly taken aback,” said he.

      “I am.”

      “I ought to make you sign a paper to that effect.”

      “Why?”

      “Because in five minutes you will say that it is all so absurdly
      simple.”

      “I am sure that I shall say nothing of the kind.”

      “You see, my dear Watson,”—he propped his test-tube in the rack,
      and began to lecture with the air of a professor addressing his
      class—“it is not really difficult to construct a series of
      inferences, each dependent upon its predecessor and each simple
      in itself. If, after doing so, one simply knocks out all the
      central inferences and presents one’s audience with the
      starting-point and the conclusion, one may produce a startling,
      though possibly a meretricious, effect. Now, it was not really
      difficult, by an inspection of the groove between your left
      forefinger and thumb, to feel sure that you did _not_ propose to
      invest your small capital in the gold fields.”

      “I see no connection.”

      “Very likely not; but I can quickly show you a close connection.
      Here are the missing links of the very simple chain: 1. You had
      chalk between your left finger and thumb when you returned from
      the club last night. 2. You put chalk there when you play
      billiards, to steady the cue. 3. You never play billiards except
      with Thurston. 4. You told me, four weeks ago, that Thurston had
      an option on some South African property which would expire in a
      month, and which he desired you to share with him. 5. Your check
      book is locked in my drawer, and you have not asked for the key.
      6. You do not propose to invest your money in this manner.”

      “How absurdly simple!” I cried.

      “Quite so!” said he, a little nettled. “Every problem becomes
      very childish when once it is explained to you. Here is an
      unexplained one. See what you can make of that, friend Watson.”
      He tossed a sheet of paper upon the table, and turned once more
      to his chemical analysis.

      I looked with amazement at the absurd hieroglyphics upon the
      paper.

      “Why, Holmes, it is a child’s drawing,” I cried.

      “Oh, that’s your idea!”

      “What else should it be?”

      “That is what Mr. Hilton Cubitt, of Riding Thorpe Manor, Norfolk,
      is very anxious to know. This little conundrum came by the first
      post, and he was to follow by the next train. There’s a ring at
      the bell, Watson. I should not be very much surprised if this
      were he.”

      A heavy step was heard upon the stairs, and an instant later
      there entered a tall, ruddy, clean-shaven gentleman, whose clear
      eyes and florid cheeks told of a life led far from the fogs of
      Baker Street. He seemed to bring a whiff of his strong, fresh,
      bracing, east-coast air with him as he entered. Having shaken
      hands with each of us, he was about to sit down, when his eye
      rested upon the paper with the curious markings, which I had just
      examined and left upon the table.

      “Well, Mr. Holmes, what do you make of these?” he cried. “They
      told me that you were fond of queer mysteries, and I don’t think
      you can find a queerer one than that. I sent the paper on ahead,
      so that you might have time to study it before I came.”

      “It is certainly rather a curious production,” said Holmes. “At
      first sight it would appear to be some childish prank. It
      consists of a number of absurd little figures dancing across the
      paper upon which they are drawn. Why should you attribute any
      importance to so grotesque an object?”

      “I never should, Mr. Holmes. But my wife does. It is frightening
      her to death. She says nothing, but I can see terror in her eyes.
      That’s why I want to sift the matter to the bottom.”

      Holmes held up the paper so that the sunlight shone full upon it.
      It was a page torn from a notebook. The markings were done in
      pencil, and ran in this way:

      AM-HERE-ABE-SLANEY

      Holmes examined it for some time, and then, folding it carefully
      up, he placed it in his pocketbook.

      “This promises to be a most interesting and unusual case,” said
      he. “You gave me a few particulars in your letter, Mr. Hilton
      Cubitt, but I should be very much obliged if you would kindly go
      over it all again for the benefit of my friend, Dr. Watson.”

      “I’m not much of a story-teller,” said our visitor, nervously
      clasping and unclasping his great, strong hands. “You’ll just ask
      me anything that I don’t make clear. I’ll begin at the time of my
      marriage last year, but I want to say first of all that, though
      I’m not a rich man, my people have been at Riding Thorpe for a
      matter of five centuries, and there is no better known family in
      the County of Norfolk. Last year I came up to London for the
      Jubilee, and I stopped at a boarding-house in Russell Square,
      because Parker, the vicar of our parish, was staying in it. There
      was an American young lady there—Patrick was the name—Elsie
      Patrick. In some way we became friends, until before my month was
      up I was as much in love as a man could be. We were quietly
      married at a registry office, and we returned to Norfolk a wedded
      couple. You’ll think it very mad, Mr. Holmes, that a man of a
      good old family should marry a wife in this fashion, knowing
      nothing of her past or of her people, but if you saw her and knew
      her, it would help you to understand.

      “She was very straight about it, was Elsie. I can’t say that she
      did not give me every chance of getting out of it if I wished to
      do so. ‘I have had some very disagreeable associations in my
      life,’ said she, ‘I wish to forget all about them. I would rather
      never allude to the past, for it is very painful to me. If you
      take me, Hilton, you will take a woman who has nothing that she
      need be personally ashamed of, but you will have to be content
      with my word for it, and to allow me to be silent as to all that
      passed up to the time when I became yours. If these conditions
      are too hard, then go back to Norfolk, and leave me to the lonely
      life in which you found me.’ It was only the day before our
      wedding that she said those very words to me. I told her that I
      was content to take her on her own terms, and I have been as good
      as my word.

      “Well we have been married now for a year, and very happy we have
      been. But about a month ago, at the end of June, I saw for the
      first time signs of trouble. One day my wife received a letter
      from America. I saw the American stamp. She turned deadly white,
      read the letter, and threw it into the fire. She made no allusion
      to it afterwards, and I made none, for a promise is a promise,
      but she has never known an easy hour from that moment. There is
      always a look of fear upon her face—a look as if she were waiting
      and expecting. She would do better to trust me. She would find
      that I was her best friend. But until she speaks, I can say
      nothing. Mind you, she is a truthful woman, Mr. Holmes, and
      whatever trouble there may have been in her past life it has been
      no fault of hers. I am only a simple Norfolk squire, but there is
      not a man in England who ranks his family honour more highly than
      I do. She knows it well, and she knew it well before she married
      me. She would never bring any stain upon it—of that I am sure.

      “Well, now I come to the queer part of my story. About a week
      ago—it was the Tuesday of last week—I found on one of the
      window-sills a number of absurd little dancing figures like these
      upon the paper. They were scrawled with chalk. I thought that it
      was the stable-boy who had drawn them, but the lad swore he knew
      nothing about it. Anyhow, they had come there during the night. I
      had them washed out, and I only mentioned the matter to my wife
      afterwards. To my surprise, she took it very seriously, and
      begged me if any more came to let her see them. None did come for
      a week, and then yesterday morning I found this paper lying on
      the sundial in the garden. I showed it to Elsie, and down she
      dropped in a dead faint. Since then she has looked like a woman
      in a dream, half dazed, and with terror always lurking in her
      eyes. It was then that I wrote and sent the paper to you, Mr.
      Holmes. It was not a thing that I could take to the police, for
      they would have laughed at me, but you will tell me what to do. I
      am not a rich man, but if there is any danger threatening my
      little woman, I would spend my last copper to shield her.”

      He was a fine creature, this man of the old English soil—simple,
      straight, and gentle, with his great, earnest blue eyes and
      broad, comely face. His love for his wife and his trust in her
      shone in his features. Holmes had listened to his story with the
      utmost attention, and now he sat for some time in silent thought.

      “Don’t you think, Mr. Cubitt,” said he, at last, “that your best
      plan would be to make a direct appeal to your wife, and to ask
      her to share her secret with you?”

      Hilton Cubitt shook his massive head.

      “A promise is a promise, Mr. Holmes. If Elsie wished to tell me
      she would. If not, it is not for me to force her confidence. But
      I am justified in taking my own line—and I will.”

      “Then I will help you with all my heart. In the first place, have
      you heard of any strangers being seen in your neighbourhood?”

      “No.”

      “I presume that it is a very quiet place. Any fresh face would
      cause comment?”

      “In the immediate neighbourhood, yes. But we have several small
      watering-places not very far away. And the farmers take in
      lodgers.”

      “These hieroglyphics have evidently a meaning. If it is a purely
      arbitrary one, it may be impossible for us to solve it. If, on
      the other hand, it is systematic, I have no doubt that we shall
      get to the bottom of it. But this particular sample is so short
      that I can do nothing, and the facts which you have brought me
      are so indefinite that we have no basis for an investigation. I
      would suggest that you return to Norfolk, that you keep a keen
      lookout, and that you take an exact copy of any fresh dancing men
      which may appear. It is a thousand pities that we have not a
      reproduction of those which were done in chalk upon the
      window-sill. Make a discreet inquiry also as to any strangers in
      the neighbourhood. When you have collected some fresh evidence,
      come to me again. That is the best advice which I can give you,
      Mr. Hilton Cubitt. If there are any pressing fresh developments,
      I shall be always ready to run down and see you in your Norfolk
      home.”

      The interview left Sherlock Holmes very thoughtful, and several
      times in the next few days I saw him take his slip of paper from
      his notebook and look long and earnestly at the curious figures
      inscribed upon it. He made no allusion to the affair, however,
      until one afternoon a fortnight or so later. I was going out when
      he called me back.

      “You had better stay here, Watson.”

      “Why?”

      “Because I had a wire from Hilton Cubitt this morning. You
      remember Hilton Cubitt, of the dancing men? He was to reach
      Liverpool Street at one-twenty. He may be here at any moment. I
      gather from his wire that there have been some new incidents of
      importance.”

      We had not long to wait, for our Norfolk squire came straight
      from the station as fast as a hansom could bring him. He was
      looking worried and depressed, with tired eyes and a lined
      forehead.

      “It’s getting on my nerves, this business, Mr. Holmes,” said he,
      as he sank, like a wearied man, into an armchair. “It’s bad
      enough to feel that you are surrounded by unseen, unknown folk,
      who have some kind of design upon you, but when, in addition to
      that, you know that it is just killing your wife by inches, then
      it becomes as much as flesh and blood can endure. She’s wearing
      away under it—just wearing away before my eyes.”

      “Has she said anything yet?”

      “No, Mr. Holmes, she has not. And yet there have been times when
      the poor girl has wanted to speak, and yet could not quite bring
      herself to take the plunge. I have tried to help her, but I
      daresay I did it clumsily, and scared her from it. She has spoken
      about my old family, and our reputation in the county, and our
      pride in our unsullied honour, and I always felt it was leading
      to the point, but somehow it turned off before we got there.”

      “But you have found out something for yourself?”

      “A good deal, Mr. Holmes. I have several fresh dancing-men
      pictures for you to examine, and, what is more important, I have
      seen the fellow.”

      “What, the man who draws them?”

      “Yes, I saw him at his work. But I will tell you everything in
      order. When I got back after my visit to you, the very first
      thing I saw next morning was a fresh crop of dancing men. They
      had been drawn in chalk upon the black wooden door of the
      tool-house, which stands beside the lawn in full view of the
      front windows. I took an exact copy, and here it is.” He unfolded
      a paper and laid it upon the table. Here is a copy of the
      hieroglyphics:

      AT-ELRIGES

      “Excellent!” said Holmes. “Excellent! Pray continue.”

      “When I had taken the copy, I rubbed out the marks, but, two
      mornings later, a fresh inscription had appeared. I have a copy
      of it here:”

      COME-ELSIE

      Holmes rubbed his hands and chuckled with delight.

      “Our material is rapidly accumulating,” said he.

      “Three days later a message was left scrawled upon paper, and
      placed under a pebble upon the sundial. Here it is. The
      characters are, as you see, exactly the same as the last one.
      After that I determined to lie in wait, so I got out my revolver
      and I sat up in my study, which overlooks the lawn and garden.
      About two in the morning I was seated by the window, all being
      dark save for the moonlight outside, when I heard steps behind
      me, and there was my wife in her dressing-gown. She implored me
      to come to bed. I told her frankly that I wished to see who it
      was who played such absurd tricks upon us. She answered that it
      was some senseless practical joke, and that I should not take any
      notice of it.

      “‘If it really annoys you, Hilton, we might go and travel, you
      and I, and so avoid this nuisance.’

      “‘What, be driven out of our own house by a practical joker?’
      said I. ‘Why, we should have the whole county laughing at us.’

      “‘Well, come to bed,’ said she, ‘and we can discuss it in the
      morning.’

      “Suddenly, as she spoke, I saw her white face grow whiter yet in
      the moonlight, and her hand tightened upon my shoulder. Something
      was moving in the shadow of the tool-house. I saw a dark,
      creeping figure which crawled round the corner and squatted in
      front of the door. Seizing my pistol, I was rushing out, when my
      wife threw her arms round me and held me with convulsive
      strength. I tried to throw her off, but she clung to me most
      desperately. At last I got clear, but by the time I had opened
      the door and reached the house the creature was gone. He had left
      a trace of his presence, however, for there on the door was the
      very same arrangement of dancing men which had already twice
      appeared, and which I have copied on that paper. There was no
      other sign of the fellow anywhere, though I ran all over the
      grounds. And yet the amazing thing is that he must have been
      there all the time, for when I examined the door again in the
      morning, he had scrawled some more of his pictures under the line
      which I had already seen.”

      “Have you that fresh drawing?”

      “Yes, it is very short, but I made a copy of it, and here it is.”

      Again he produced a paper. The new dance was in this form:

      NEVER

      “Tell me,” said Holmes—and I could see by his eyes that he was
      much excited—“was this a mere addition to the first or did it
      appear to be entirely separate?”

      “It was on a different panel of the door.”

      “Excellent! This is far the most important of all for our
      purpose. It fills me with hopes. Now, Mr. Hilton Cubitt, please
      continue your most interesting statement.”

      “I have nothing more to say, Mr. Holmes, except that I was angry
      with my wife that night for having held me back when I might have
      caught the skulking rascal. She said that she feared that I might
      come to harm. For an instant it had crossed my mind that perhaps
      what she really feared was that _he_ might come to harm, for I
      could not doubt that she knew who this man was, and what he meant
      by these strange signals. But there is a tone in my wife’s voice,
      Mr. Holmes, and a look in her eyes which forbid doubt, and I am
      sure that it was indeed my own safety that was in her mind.
      There’s the whole case, and now I want your advice as to what I
      ought to do. My own inclination is to put half a dozen of my farm
      lads in the shrubbery, and when this fellow comes again to give
      him such a hiding that he will leave us in peace for the future.”

      “I fear it is too deep a case for such simple remedies,” said
      Holmes. “How long can you stay in London?”

      “I must go back to-day. I would not leave my wife alone all night
      for anything. She is very nervous, and begged me to come back.”

      “I daresay you are right. But if you could have stopped, I might
      possibly have been able to return with you in a day or two.
      Meanwhile you will leave me these papers, and I think that it is
      very likely that I shall be able to pay you a visit shortly and
      to throw some light upon your case.”

      Sherlock Holmes preserved his calm professional manner until our
      visitor had left us, although it was easy for me, who knew him so
      well, to see that he was profoundly excited. The moment that
      Hilton Cubitt’s broad back had disappeared through the door my
      comrade rushed to the table, laid out all the slips of paper
      containing dancing men in front of him, and threw himself into an
      intricate and elaborate calculation. For two hours I watched him
      as he covered sheet after sheet of paper with figures and
      letters, so completely absorbed in his task that he had evidently
      forgotten my presence. Sometimes he was making progress and
      whistled and sang at his work; sometimes he was puzzled, and
      would sit for long spells with a furrowed brow and a vacant eye.
      Finally he sprang from his chair with a cry of satisfaction, and
      walked up and down the room rubbing his hands together. Then he
      wrote a long telegram upon a cable form. “If my answer to this is
      as I hope, you will have a very pretty case to add to your
      collection, Watson,” said he. “I expect that we shall be able to
      go down to Norfolk tomorrow, and to take our friend some very
      definite news as to the secret of his annoyance.”

      I confess that I was filled with curiosity, but I was aware that
      Holmes liked to make his disclosures at his own time and in his
      own way, so I waited until it should suit him to take me into his
      confidence.

      But there was a delay in that answering telegram, and two days of
      impatience followed, during which Holmes pricked up his ears at
      every ring of the bell. On the evening of the second there came a
      letter from Hilton Cubitt. All was quiet with him, save that a
      long inscription had appeared that morning upon the pedestal of
      the sundial. He inclosed a copy of it, which is here reproduced:

      ELSIE-PREPARE-TO-MEET-THY-GOD

      Holmes bent over this grotesque frieze for some minutes, and then
      suddenly sprang to his feet with an exclamation of surprise and
      dismay. His face was haggard with anxiety.

      “We have let this affair go far enough,” said he. “Is there a
      train to North Walsham to-night?”

      I turned up the time-table. The last had just gone.

      “Then we shall breakfast early and take the very first in the
      morning,” said Holmes. “Our presence is most urgently needed. Ah!
      here is our expected cablegram. One moment, Mrs. Hudson, there
      may be an answer. No, that is quite as I expected. This message
      makes it even more essential that we should not lose an hour in
      letting Hilton Cubitt know how matters stand, for it is a
      singular and a dangerous web in which our simple Norfolk squire
      is entangled.”

      So, indeed, it proved, and as I come to the dark conclusion of a
      story which had seemed to me to be only childish and bizarre, I
      experience once again the dismay and horror with which I was
      filled. Would that I had some brighter ending to communicate to
      my readers, but these are the chronicles of fact, and I must
      follow to their dark crisis the strange chain of events which for
      some days made Riding Thorpe Manor a household word through the
      length and breadth of England.

      We had hardly alighted at North Walsham, and mentioned the name
      of our destination, when the station-master hurried towards us.
      “I suppose that you are the detectives from London?” said he.

      A look of annoyance passed over Holmes’s face.

      “What makes you think such a thing?”

      “Because Inspector Martin from Norwich has just passed through.
      But maybe you are the surgeons. She’s not dead—or wasn’t by last
      accounts. You may be in time to save her yet—though it be for the
      gallows.”

      Holmes’s brow was dark with anxiety.

      “We are going to Riding Thorpe Manor,” said he, “but we have
      heard nothing of what has passed there.”

      “It’s a terrible business,” said the stationmaster. “They are
      shot, both Mr. Hilton Cubitt and his wife. She shot him and then
      herself—so the servants say. He’s dead and her life is despaired
      of. Dear, dear, one of the oldest families in the county of
      Norfolk, and one of the most honoured.”

      Without a word Holmes hurried to a carriage, and during the long
      seven miles’ drive he never opened his mouth. Seldom have I seen
      him so utterly despondent. He had been uneasy during all our
      journey from town, and I had observed that he had turned over the
      morning papers with anxious attention, but now this sudden
      realization of his worst fears left him in a blank melancholy. He
      leaned back in his seat, lost in gloomy speculation. Yet there
      was much around to interest us, for we were passing through as
      singular a countryside as any in England, where a few scattered
      cottages represented the population of to-day, while on every
      hand enormous square-towered churches bristled up from the flat
      green landscape and told of the glory and prosperity of old East
      Anglia. At last the violet rim of the German Ocean appeared over
      the green edge of the Norfolk coast, and the driver pointed with
      his whip to two old brick and timber gables which projected from
      a grove of trees. “That’s Riding Thorpe Manor,” said he.

      As we drove up to the porticoed front door, I observed in front
      of it, beside the tennis lawn, the black tool-house and the
      pedestalled sundial with which we had such strange associations.
      A dapper little man, with a quick, alert manner and a waxed
      moustache, had just descended from a high dog-cart. He introduced
      himself as Inspector Martin, of the Norfolk Constabulary, and he
      was considerably astonished when he heard the name of my
      companion.

      “Why, Mr. Holmes, the crime was only committed at three this
      morning. How could you hear of it in London and get to the spot
      as soon as I?”

      “I anticipated it. I came in the hope of preventing it.”

      “Then you must have important evidence, of which we are ignorant,
      for they were said to be a most united couple.”

      “I have only the evidence of the dancing men,” said Holmes. “I
      will explain the matter to you later. Meanwhile, since it is too
      late to prevent this tragedy, I am very anxious that I should use
      the knowledge which I possess in order to insure that justice be
      done. Will you associate me in your investigation, or will you
      prefer that I should act independently?”

      “I should be proud to feel that we were acting together, Mr.
      Holmes,” said the inspector, earnestly.

      “In that case I should be glad to hear the evidence and to
      examine the premises without an instant of unnecessary delay.”

      Inspector Martin had the good sense to allow my friend to do
      things in his own fashion, and contented himself with carefully
      noting the results. The local surgeon, an old, white-haired man,
      had just come down from Mrs. Hilton Cubitt’s room, and he
      reported that her injuries were serious, but not necessarily
      fatal. The bullet had passed through the front of her brain, and
      it would probably be some time before she could regain
      consciousness. On the question of whether she had been shot or
      had shot herself, he would not venture to express any decided
      opinion. Certainly the bullet had been discharged at very close
      quarters. There was only the one pistol found in the room, two
      barrels of which had been emptied. Mr. Hilton Cubitt had been
      shot through the heart. It was equally conceivable that he had
      shot her and then himself, or that she had been the criminal, for
      the revolver lay upon the floor midway between them.

      “Has he been moved?” asked Holmes.

      “We have moved nothing except the lady. We could not leave her
      lying wounded upon the floor.”

      “How long have you been here, Doctor?”

      “Since four o’clock.”

      “Anyone else?”

      “Yes, the constable here.”

      “And you have touched nothing?”

      “Nothing.”

      “You have acted with great discretion. Who sent for you?”

      “The housemaid, Saunders.”

      “Was it she who gave the alarm?”

      “She and Mrs. King, the cook.”

      “Where are they now?”

      “In the kitchen, I believe.”

      “Then I think we had better hear their story at once.”

      The old hall, oak-panelled and high-windowed, had been turned
      into a court of investigation. Holmes sat in a great,
      old-fashioned chair, his inexorable eyes gleaming out of his
      haggard face. I could read in them a set purpose to devote his
      life to this quest until the client whom he had failed to save
      should at last be avenged. The trim Inspector Martin, the old,
      grey-headed country doctor, myself, and a stolid village
      policeman made up the rest of that strange company.

      The two women told their story clearly enough. They had been
      aroused from their sleep by the sound of an explosion, which had
      been followed a minute later by a second one. They slept in
      adjoining rooms, and Mrs. King had rushed in to Saunders.
      Together they had descended the stairs. The door of the study was
      open, and a candle was burning upon the table. Their master lay
      upon his face in the centre of the room. He was quite dead. Near
      the window his wife was crouching, her head leaning against the
      wall. She was horribly wounded, and the side of her face was red
      with blood. She breathed heavily, but was incapable of saying
      anything. The passage, as well as the room, was full of smoke and
      the smell of powder. The window was certainly shut and fastened
      upon the inside. Both women were positive upon the point. They
      had at once sent for the doctor and for the constable. Then, with
      the aid of the groom and the stable-boy, they had conveyed their
      injured mistress to her room. Both she and her husband had
      occupied the bed. She was clad in her dress—he in his
      dressing-gown, over his night-clothes. Nothing had been moved in
      the study. So far as they knew, there had never been any quarrel
      between husband and wife. They had always looked upon them as a
      very united couple.

      These were the main points of the servants’ evidence. In answer
      to Inspector Martin, they were clear that every door was fastened
      upon the inside, and that no one could have escaped from the
      house. In answer to Holmes, they both remembered that they were
      conscious of the smell of powder from the moment that they ran
      out of their rooms upon the top floor. “I commend that fact very
      carefully to your attention,” said Holmes to his professional
      colleague. “And now I think that we are in a position to
      undertake a thorough examination of the room.”

      The study proved to be a small chamber, lined on three sides with
      books, and with a writing-table facing an ordinary window, which
      looked out upon the garden. Our first attention was given to the
      body of the unfortunate squire, whose huge frame lay stretched
      across the room. His disordered dress showed that he had been
      hastily aroused from sleep. The bullet had been fired at him from
      the front, and had remained in his body, after penetrating the
      heart. His death had certainly been instantaneous and painless.
      There was no powder-marking either upon his dressing-gown or on
      his hands. According to the country surgeon, the lady had stains
      upon her face, but none upon her hand.

      “The absence of the latter means nothing, though its presence may
      mean everything,” said Holmes. “Unless the powder from a badly
      fitting cartridge happens to spurt backward, one may fire many
      shots without leaving a sign. I would suggest that Mr. Cubitt’s
      body may now be removed. I suppose, Doctor, you have not
      recovered the bullet which wounded the lady?”

      “A serious operation will be necessary before that can be done.
      But there are still four cartridges in the revolver. Two have
      been fired and two wounds inflicted, so that each bullet can be
      accounted for.”

      “So it would seem,” said Holmes. “Perhaps you can account also
      for the bullet which has so obviously struck the edge of the
      window?”

      He had turned suddenly, and his long, thin finger was pointing to
      a hole which had been drilled right through the lower
      window-sash, about an inch above the bottom.

      “By George!” cried the inspector. “How ever did you see that?”

      “Because I looked for it.”

      “Wonderful!” said the country doctor. “You are certainly right,
      sir. Then a third shot has been fired, and therefore a third
      person must have been present. But who could that have been, and
      how could he have got away?”

      “That is the problem which we are now about to solve,” said
      Sherlock Holmes. “You remember, Inspector Martin, when the
      servants said that on leaving their room they were at once
      conscious of a smell of powder, I remarked that the point was an
      extremely important one?”

      “Yes, sir; but I confess I did not quite follow you.”

      “It suggested that at the time of the firing, the window as well
      as the door of the room had been open. Otherwise the fumes of
      powder could not have been blown so rapidly through the house. A
      draught in the room was necessary for that. Both door and window
      were only open for a very short time, however.”

      “How do you prove that?”

      “Because the candle was not guttered.”

      “Capital!” cried the inspector. “Capital!”

      “Feeling sure that the window had been open at the time of the
      tragedy, I conceived that there might have been a third person in
      the affair, who stood outside this opening and fired through it.
      Any shot directed at this person might hit the sash. I looked,
      and there, sure enough, was the bullet mark!”

      “But how came the window to be shut and fastened?”

      “The woman’s first instinct would be to shut and fasten the
      window. But, halloa! What is this?”

      It was a lady’s hand-bag which stood upon the study table—a trim
      little handbag of crocodile-skin and silver. Holmes opened it and
      turned the contents out. There were twenty fifty-pound notes of
      the Bank of England, held together by an india-rubber
      band—nothing else.

      “This must be preserved, for it will figure in the trial,” said
      Holmes, as he handed the bag with its contents to the inspector.
      “It is now necessary that we should try to throw some light upon
      this third bullet, which has clearly, from the splintering of the
      wood, been fired from inside the room. I should like to see Mrs.
      King, the cook, again. You said, Mrs. King, that you were
      awakened by a _loud_ explosion. When you said that, did you mean
      that it seemed to you to be louder than the second one?”

      “Well, sir, it wakened me from my sleep, so it is hard to judge.
      But it did seem very loud.”

      “You don’t think that it might have been two shots fired almost
      at the same instant?”

      “I am sure I couldn’t say, sir.”

      “I believe that it was undoubtedly so. I rather think, Inspector
      Martin, that we have now exhausted all that this room can teach
      us. If you will kindly step round with me, we shall see what
      fresh evidence the garden has to offer.”

      A flower-bed extended up to the study window, and we all broke
      into an exclamation as we approached it. The flowers were
      trampled down, and the soft soil was imprinted all over with
      footmarks. Large, masculine feet they were, with peculiarly long,
      sharp toes. Holmes hunted about among the grass and leaves like a
      retriever after a wounded bird. Then, with a cry of satisfaction,
      he bent forward and picked up a little brazen cylinder.

      “I thought so,” said he, “the revolver had an ejector, and here
      is the third cartridge. I really think, Inspector Martin, that
      our case is almost complete.”

      The country inspector’s face had shown his intense amazement at
      the rapid and masterful progress of Holmes’s investigation. At
      first he had shown some disposition to assert his own position,
      but now he was overcome with admiration, and ready to follow
      without question wherever Holmes led.

      “Whom do you suspect?” he asked.

      “I’ll go into that later. There are several points in this
      problem which I have not been able to explain to you yet. Now
      that I have got so far, I had best proceed on my own lines, and
      then clear the whole matter up once and for all.”

      “Just as you wish, Mr. Holmes, so long as we get our man.”

      “I have no desire to make mysteries, but it is impossible at the
      moment of action to enter into long and complex explanations. I
      have the threads of this affair all in my hand. Even if this lady
      should never recover consciousness, we can still reconstruct the
      events of last night and insure that justice be done. First of
      all, I wish to know whether there is any inn in this
      neighbourhood known as ‘Elrige’s’?”

      The servants were cross-questioned, but none of them had heard of
      such a place. The stable-boy threw a light upon the matter by
      remembering that a farmer of that name lived some miles off, in
      the direction of East Ruston.

      “Is it a lonely farm?”

      “Very lonely, sir.”

      “Perhaps they have not heard yet of all that happened here during
      the night?”

      “Maybe not, sir.”

      Holmes thought for a little, and then a curious smile played over
      his face.

      “Saddle a horse, my lad,” said he. “I shall wish you to take a
      note to Elrige’s Farm.”

      He took from his pocket the various slips of the dancing men.
      With these in front of him, he worked for some time at the
      study-table. Finally he handed a note to the boy, with directions
      to put it into the hands of the person to whom it was addressed,
      and especially to answer no questions of any sort which might be
      put to him. I saw the outside of the note, addressed in
      straggling, irregular characters, very unlike Holmes’s usual
      precise hand. It was consigned to Mr. Abe Slaney, Elriges Farm,
      East Ruston, Norfolk.

      “I think, Inspector,” Holmes remarked, “that you would do well to
      telegraph for an escort, as, if my calculations prove to be
      correct, you may have a particularly dangerous prisoner to convey
      to the county jail. The boy who takes this note could no doubt
      forward your telegram. If there is an afternoon train to town,
      Watson, I think we should do well to take it, as I have a
      chemical analysis of some interest to finish, and this
      investigation draws rapidly to a close.”

      When the youth had been dispatched with the note, Sherlock Holmes
      gave his instructions to the servants. If any visitor were to
      call asking for Mrs. Hilton Cubitt, no information should be
      given as to her condition, but he was to be shown at once into
      the drawing-room. He impressed these points upon them with the
      utmost earnestness. Finally he led the way into the drawing-room,
      with the remark that the business was now out of our hands, and
      that we must while away the time as best we might until we could
      see what was in store for us. The doctor had departed to his
      patients, and only the inspector and myself remained.

      “I think that I can help you to pass an hour in an interesting
      and profitable manner,” said Holmes, drawing his chair up to the
      table, and spreading out in front of him the various papers upon
      which were recorded the antics of the dancing men. “As to you,
      friend Watson, I owe you every atonement for having allowed your
      natural curiosity to remain so long unsatisfied. To you,
      Inspector, the whole incident may appeal as a remarkable
      professional study. I must tell you, first of all, the
      interesting circumstances connected with the previous
      consultations which Mr. Hilton Cubitt has had with me in Baker
      Street.” He then shortly recapitulated the facts which have
      already been recorded. “I have here in front of me these singular
      productions, at which one might smile, had they not proved
      themselves to be the forerunners of so terrible a tragedy. I am
      fairly familiar with all forms of secret writings, and am myself
      the author of a trifling monograph upon the subject, in which I
      analyze one hundred and sixty separate ciphers, but I confess
      that this is entirely new to me. The object of those who invented
      the system has apparently been to conceal that these characters
      convey a message, and to give the idea that they are the mere
      random sketches of children.

      “Having once recognized, however, that the symbols stood for
      letters, and having applied the rules which guide us in all forms
      of secret writings, the solution was easy enough. The first
      message submitted to me was so short that it was impossible for
      me to do more than to say, with some confidence, that the symbol
      XXX stood for E. As you are aware, E is the most common letter in
      the English alphabet, and it predominates to so marked an extent
      that even in a short sentence one would expect to find it most
      often. Out of fifteen symbols in the first message, four were the
      same, so it was reasonable to set this down as E. It is true that
      in some cases the figure was bearing a flag, and in some cases
      not, but it was probable, from the way in which the flags were
      distributed, that they were used to break the sentence up into
      words. I accepted this as a hypothesis, and noted that E was
      represented by

      E

      “But now came the real difficulty of the inquiry. The order of
      the English letters after E is by no means well marked, and any
      preponderance which may be shown in an average of a printed sheet
      may be reversed in a single short sentence. Speaking roughly, T,
      A, O, I, N, S, H, R, D, and L are the numerical order in which
      letters occur, but T, A, O, and I are very nearly abreast of each
      other, and it would be an endless task to try each combination
      until a meaning was arrived at. I therefore waited for fresh
      material. In my second interview with Mr. Hilton Cubitt he was
      able to give me two other short sentences and one message, which
      appeared—since there was no flag—to be a single word. Here are
      the symbols. Now, in the single word I have already got the two
      E’s coming second and fourth in a word of five letters. It might
      be ‘sever,’ or ‘lever,’ or ‘never.’ There can be no question that
      the latter as a reply to an appeal is far the most probable, and
      the circumstances pointed to its being a reply written by the
      lady. Accepting it as correct, we are now able to say that the
      symbols stand respectively for N, V, and R.

      N-V-R

      “Even now I was in considerable difficulty, but a happy thought
      put me in possession of several other letters. It occurred to me
      that if these appeals came, as I expected, from someone who had
      been intimate with the lady in her early life, a combination
      which contained two E’s with three letters between might very
      well stand for the name ‘ELSIE.’ On examination I found that such
      a combination formed the termination of the message which was
      three times repeated. It was certainly some appeal to ‘Elsie.’ In
      this way I had got my L, S, and I. But what appeal could it be?
      There were only four letters in the word which preceded ‘Elsie,’
      and it ended in E. Surely the word must be ‘COME.’ I tried all
      other four letters ending in E, but could find none to fit the
      case. So now I was in possession of C, O, and M, and I was in a
      position to attack the first message once more, dividing it into
      words and putting dots for each symbol which was still unknown.
      So treated, it worked out in this fashion:

      .M .ERE ..E SL.NE.

      “Now the first letter _can_ only be A, which is a most useful
      discovery, since it occurs no fewer than three times in this
      short sentence, and the H is also apparent in the second word.
      Now it becomes:

      AM HERE A.E SLANE.

      Or, filling in the obvious vacancies in the name:

      AM HERE ABE SLANEY.

      I had so many letters now that I could proceed with considerable
      confidence to the second message, which worked out in this
      fashion:

      A. ELRI. ES.

      Here I could only make sense by putting T and G for the missing
      letters, and supposing that the name was that of some house or
      inn at which the writer was staying.”

      Inspector Martin and I had listened with the utmost interest to
      the full and clear account of how my friend had produced results
      which had led to so complete a command over our difficulties.

      “What did you do then, sir?” asked the inspector.

      “I had every reason to suppose that this Abe Slaney was an
      American, since Abe is an American contraction, and since a
      letter from America had been the starting-point of all the
      trouble. I had also every cause to think that there was some
      criminal secret in the matter. The lady’s allusions to her past,
      and her refusal to take her husband into her confidence, both
      pointed in that direction. I therefore cabled to my friend,
      Wilson Hargreave, of the New York Police Bureau, who has more
      than once made use of my knowledge of London crime. I asked him
      whether the name of Abe Slaney was known to him. Here is his
      reply: ‘The most dangerous crook in Chicago.’ On the very evening
      upon which I had his answer, Hilton Cubitt sent me the last
      message from Slaney. Working with known letters, it took this
      form:

      ELSIE .RE.ARE TO MEET THY GO.

      The addition of a P and a D completed a message which showed me
      that the rascal was proceeding from persuasion to threats, and my
      knowledge of the crooks of Chicago prepared me to find that he
      might very rapidly put his words into action. I at once came to
      Norfolk with my friend and colleague, Dr. Watson, but, unhappily,
      only in time to find that the worst had already occurred.”

      “It is a privilege to be associated with you in the handling of a
      case,” said the inspector, warmly. “You will excuse me, however,
      if I speak frankly to you. You are only answerable to yourself,
      but I have to answer to my superiors. If this Abe Slaney, living
      at Elrige’s, is indeed the murderer, and if he has made his
      escape while I am seated here, I should certainly get into
      serious trouble.”

      “You need not be uneasy. He will not try to escape.”

      “How do you know?”

      “To fly would be a confession of guilt.”

      “Then let us go arrest him.”

      “I expect him here every instant.”

      “But why should he come?”

      “Because I have written and asked him.”

      “But this is incredible, Mr. Holmes! Why should he come because
      you have asked him? Would not such a request rather rouse his
      suspicions and cause him to fly?”

      “I think I have known how to frame the letter,” said Sherlock
      Holmes. “In fact, if I am not very much mistaken, here is the
      gentleman himself coming up the drive.”

      A man was striding up the path which led to the door. He was a
      tall, handsome, swarthy fellow, clad in a suit of grey flannel,
      with a Panama hat, a bristling black beard, and a great,
      aggressive hooked nose, and flourishing a cane as he walked. He
      swaggered up the path as if the place belonged to him, and we
      heard his loud, confident peal at the bell.

      “I think, gentlemen,” said Holmes, quietly, “that we had best
      take up our position behind the door. Every precaution is
      necessary when dealing with such a fellow. You will need your
      handcuffs, Inspector. You can leave the talking to me.”

      We waited in silence for a minute—one of those minutes which one
      can never forget. Then the door opened and the man stepped in. In
      an instant Holmes clapped a pistol to his head, and Martin
      slipped the handcuffs over his wrists. It was all done so swiftly
      and deftly that the fellow was helpless before he knew that he
      was attacked. He glared from one to the other of us with a pair
      of blazing black eyes. Then he burst into a bitter laugh.

      “Well, gentlemen, you have the drop on me this time. I seem to
      have knocked up against something hard. But I came here in answer
      to a letter from Mrs. Hilton Cubitt. Don’t tell me that she is in
      this? Don’t tell me that she helped to set a trap for me?”

      “Mrs. Hilton Cubitt was seriously injured, and is at death’s
      door.”

      The man gave a hoarse cry of grief, which rang through the house.

      “You’re crazy!” he cried, fiercely. “It was he that was hurt, not
      she. Who would have hurt little Elsie? I may have threatened
      her—God forgive me!—but I would not have touched a hair of her
      pretty head. Take it back—you! Say that she is not hurt!”

      “She was found badly wounded, by the side of her dead husband.”

      He sank with a deep groan on the settee and buried his face in
      his manacled hands. For five minutes he was silent. Then he
      raised his face once more, and spoke with the cold composure of
      despair.

      “I have nothing to hide from you, gentlemen,” said he. “If I shot
      the man he had his shot at me, and there’s no murder in that. But
      if you think I could have hurt that woman, then you don’t know
      either me or her. I tell you, there was never a man in this world
      loved a woman more than I loved her. I had a right to her. She
      was pledged to me years ago. Who was this Englishman that he
      should come between us? I tell you that I had the first right to
      her, and that I was only claiming my own.”

      “She broke away from your influence when she found the man that
      you are,” said Holmes, sternly. “She fled from America to avoid
      you, and she married an honourable gentleman in England. You
      dogged her and followed her and made her life a misery to her, in
      order to induce her to abandon the husband whom she loved and
      respected in order to fly with you, whom she feared and hated.
      You have ended by bringing about the death of a noble man and
      driving his wife to suicide. That is your record in this
      business, Mr. Abe Slaney, and you will answer for it to the law.”

      “If Elsie dies, I care nothing what becomes of me,” said the
      American. He opened one of his hands, and looked at a note
      crumpled up in his palm. “See here, mister,” he cried, with a
      gleam of suspicion in his eyes, “you’re not trying to scare me
      over this, are you? If the lady is hurt as bad as you say, who
      was it that wrote this note?” He tossed it forward on to the
      table.

      “I wrote it, to bring you here.”

      “You wrote it? There was no one on earth outside the Joint who
      knew the secret of the dancing men. How came you to write it?”

      “What one man can invent another can discover,” said Holmes.
      “There is a cab coming to convey you to Norwich, Mr. Slaney. But
      meanwhile, you have time to make some small reparation for the
      injury you have wrought. Are you aware that Mrs. Hilton Cubitt
      has herself lain under grave suspicion of the murder of her
      husband, and that it was only my presence here, and the knowledge
      which I happened to possess, which has saved her from the
      accusation? The least that you owe her is to make it clear to the
      whole world that she was in no way, directly or indirectly,
      responsible for his tragic end.”

      “I ask nothing better,” said the American. “I guess the very best
      case I can make for myself is the absolute naked truth.”

      “It is my duty to warn you that it will be used against you,”
      cried the inspector, with the magnificent fair play of the
      British criminal law.

      Slaney shrugged his shoulders.

      “I’ll chance that,” said he. “First of all, I want you gentlemen
      to understand that I have known this lady since she was a child.
      There were seven of us in a gang in Chicago, and Elsie’s father
      was the boss of the Joint. He was a clever man, was old Patrick.
      It was he who invented that writing, which would pass as a
      child’s scrawl unless you just happened to have the key to it.
      Well, Elsie learned some of our ways, but she couldn’t stand the
      business, and she had a bit of honest money of her own, so she
      gave us all the slip and got away to London. She had been engaged
      to me, and she would have married me, I believe, if I had taken
      over another profession, but she would have nothing to do with
      anything on the cross. It was only after her marriage to this
      Englishman that I was able to find out where she was. I wrote to
      her, but got no answer. After that I came over, and, as letters
      were no use, I put my messages where she could read them.

      “Well, I have been here a month now. I lived in that farm, where
      I had a room down below, and could get in and out every night,
      and no one the wiser. I tried all I could to coax Elsie away. I
      knew that she read the messages, for once she wrote an answer
      under one of them. Then my temper got the better of me, and I
      began to threaten her. She sent me a letter then, imploring me to
      go away, and saying that it would break her heart if any scandal
      should come upon her husband. She said that she would come down
      when her husband was asleep at three in the morning, and speak
      with me through the end window, if I would go away afterwards and
      leave her in peace. She came down and brought money with her,
      trying to bribe me to go. This made me mad, and I caught her arm
      and tried to pull her through the window. At that moment in
      rushed the husband with his revolver in his hand. Elsie had sunk
      down upon the floor, and we were face to face. I was heeled also,
      and I held up my gun to scare him off and let me get away. He
      fired and missed me. I pulled off almost at the same instant, and
      down he dropped. I made away across the garden, and as I went I
      heard the window shut behind me. That’s God’s truth, gentlemen,
      every word of it, and I heard no more about it until that lad
      came riding up with a note which made me walk in here, like a
      jay, and give myself into your hands.”

      A cab had driven up whilst the American had been talking. Two
      uniformed policemen sat inside. Inspector Martin rose and touched
      his prisoner on the shoulder.

      “It is time for us to go.”

      “Can I see her first?”

      “No, she is not conscious. Mr. Sherlock Holmes, I only hope that
      if ever again I have an important case, I shall have the good
      fortune to have you by my side.”

      We stood at the window and watched the cab drive away. As I
      turned back, my eye caught the pellet of paper which the prisoner
      had tossed upon the table. It was the note with which Holmes had
      decoyed him.

      “See if you can read it, Watson,” said he, with a smile.

      It contained no word, but this little line of dancing men:

      COME-HERE-AT-ONCE

      “If you use the code which I have explained,” said Holmes, “you
      will find that it simply means ‘Come here at once.’ I was
      convinced that it was an invitation which he would not refuse,
      since he could never imagine that it could come from anyone but
      the lady. And so, my dear Watson, we have ended by turning the
      dancing men to good when they have so often been the agents of
      evil, and I think that I have fulfilled my promise of giving you
      something unusual for your notebook. Three-forty is our train,
      and I fancy we should be back in Baker Street for dinner.”

      Only one word of epilogue. The American, Abe Slaney, was
      condemned to death at the winter assizes at Norwich, but his
      penalty was changed to penal servitude in consideration of
      mitigating circumstances, and the certainty that Hilton Cubitt
      had fired the first shot. Of Mrs. Hilton Cubitt I only know that
      I have heard she recovered entirely, and that she still remains a
      widow, devoting her whole life to the care of the poor and to the
      administration of her husband’s estate.




THE ADVENTURE OF THE SOLITARY CYCLIST


      From the years 1894 to 1901 inclusive, Mr. Sherlock Holmes was a
      very busy man. It is safe to say that there was no public case of
      any difficulty in which he was not consulted during those eight
      years, and there were hundreds of private cases, some of them of
      the most intricate and extraordinary character, in which he
      played a prominent part. Many startling successes and a few
      unavoidable failures were the outcome of this long period of
      continuous work. As I have preserved very full notes of all these
      cases, and was myself personally engaged in many of them, it may
      be imagined that it is no easy task to know which I should select
      to lay before the public. I shall, however, preserve my former
      rule, and give the preference to those cases which derive their
      interest not so much from the brutality of the crime as from the
      ingenuity and dramatic quality of the solution. For this reason I
      will now lay before the reader the facts connected with Miss
      Violet Smith, the solitary cyclist of Charlington, and the
      curious sequel of our investigation, which culminated in
      unexpected tragedy. It is true that the circumstance did not
      admit of any striking illustration of those powers for which my
      friend was famous, but there were some points about the case
      which made it stand out in those long records of crime from which
      I gather the material for these little narratives.

      On referring to my notebook for the year 1895, I find that it was
      upon Saturday, the 23rd of April, that we first heard of Miss
      Violet Smith. Her visit was, I remember, extremely unwelcome to
      Holmes, for he was immersed at the moment in a very abstruse and
      complicated problem concerning the peculiar persecution to which
      John Vincent Harden, the well-known tobacco millionaire, had been
      subjected. My friend, who loved above all things precision and
      concentration of thought, resented anything which distracted his
      attention from the matter in hand. And yet, without a harshness
      which was foreign to his nature, it was impossible to refuse to
      listen to the story of the young and beautiful woman, tall,
      graceful, and queenly, who presented herself at Baker Street late
      in the evening, and implored his assistance and advice. It was
      vain to urge that his time was already fully occupied, for the
      young lady had come with the determination to tell her story, and
      it was evident that nothing short of force could get her out of
      the room until she had done so. With a resigned air and a
      somewhat weary smile, Holmes begged the beautiful intruder to
      take a seat, and to inform us what it was that was troubling her.

      “At least it cannot be your health,” said he, as his keen eyes
      darted over her, “so ardent a bicyclist must be full of energy.”

      She glanced down in surprise at her own feet, and I observed the
      slight roughening of the side of the sole caused by the friction
      of the edge of the pedal.

      “Yes, I bicycle a good deal, Mr. Holmes, and that has something
      to do with my visit to you to-day.”

      My friend took the lady’s ungloved hand, and examined it with as
      close an attention and as little sentiment as a scientist would
      show to a specimen.

      “You will excuse me, I am sure. It is my business,” said he, as
      he dropped it. “I nearly fell into the error of supposing that
      you were typewriting. Of course, it is obvious that it is music.
      You observe the spatulate finger-ends, Watson, which is common to
      both professions? There is a spirituality about the face,
      however”—she gently turned it towards the light—“which the
      typewriter does not generate. This lady is a musician.”

      “Yes, Mr. Holmes, I teach music.”

      “In the country, I presume, from your complexion.”

      “Yes, sir, near Farnham, on the borders of Surrey.”

      “A beautiful neighbourhood, and full of the most interesting
      associations. You remember, Watson, that it was near there that
      we took Archie Stamford, the forger. Now, Miss Violet, what has
      happened to you, near Farnham, on the borders of Surrey?”

      The young lady, with great clearness and composure, made the
      following curious statement:

      “My father is dead, Mr. Holmes. He was James Smith, who conducted
      the orchestra at the old Imperial Theatre. My mother and I were
      left without a relation in the world except one uncle, Ralph
      Smith, who went to Africa twenty-five years ago, and we have
      never had a word from him since. When father died, we were left
      very poor, but one day we were told that there was an
      advertisement in _The Times_, inquiring for our whereabouts. You
      can imagine how excited we were, for we thought that someone had
      left us a fortune. We went at once to the lawyer whose name was
      given in the paper. There we met two gentlemen, Mr. Carruthers
      and Mr. Woodley, who were home on a visit from South Africa. They
      said that my uncle was a friend of theirs, that he had died some
      months before in great poverty in Johannesburg, and that he had
      asked them with his last breath to hunt up his relations, and see
      that they were in no want. It seemed strange to us that Uncle
      Ralph, who took no notice of us when he was alive, should be so
      careful to look after us when he was dead, but Mr. Carruthers
      explained that the reason was that my uncle had just heard of the
      death of his brother, and so felt responsible for our fate.”

      “Excuse me,” said Holmes. “When was this interview?”

      “Last December—four months ago.”

      “Pray proceed.”

      “Mr. Woodley seemed to me to be a most odious person. He was for
      ever making eyes at me—a coarse, puffy-faced, red-moustached
      young man, with his hair plastered down on each side of his
      forehead. I thought that he was perfectly hateful—and I was sure
      that Cyril would not wish me to know such a person.”

      “Oh, Cyril is his name!” said Holmes, smiling.

      The young lady blushed and laughed.

      “Yes, Mr. Holmes, Cyril Morton, an electrical engineer, and we
      hope to be married at the end of the summer. Dear me, how _did_ I
      get talking about him? What I wished to say was that Mr. Woodley
      was perfectly odious, but that Mr. Carruthers, who was a much
      older man, was more agreeable. He was a dark, sallow,
      clean-shaven, silent person, but he had polite manners and a
      pleasant smile. He inquired how we were left, and on finding that
      we were very poor, he suggested that I should come and teach
      music to his only daughter, aged ten. I said that I did not like
      to leave my mother, on which he suggested that I should go home
      to her every week-end, and he offered me a hundred a year, which
      was certainly splendid pay. So it ended by my accepting, and I
      went down to Chiltern Grange, about six miles from Farnham. Mr.
      Carruthers was a widower, but he had engaged a lady housekeeper,
      a very respectable, elderly person, called Mrs. Dixon, to look
      after his establishment. The child was a dear, and everything
      promised well. Mr. Carruthers was very kind and very musical, and
      we had most pleasant evenings together. Every week-end I went
      home to my mother in town.

      “The first flaw in my happiness was the arrival of the
      red-moustached Mr. Woodley. He came for a visit of a week, and
      oh! it seemed three months to me. He was a dreadful person—a
      bully to everyone else, but to me something infinitely worse. He
      made odious love to me, boasted of his wealth, said that if I
      married him I could have the finest diamonds in London, and
      finally, when I would have nothing to do with him, he seized me
      in his arms one day after dinner—he was hideously strong—and
      swore that he would not let me go until I had kissed him. Mr.
      Carruthers came in and tore him from me, on which he turned upon
      his own host, knocking him down and cutting his face open. That
      was the end of his visit, as you can imagine. Mr. Carruthers
      apologized to me next day, and assured me that I should never be
      exposed to such an insult again. I have not seen Mr. Woodley
      since.

      “And now, Mr. Holmes, I come at last to the special thing which
      has caused me to ask your advice to-day. You must know that every
      Saturday forenoon I ride on my bicycle to Farnham Station, in
      order to get the 12:22 to town. The road from Chiltern Grange is
      a lonely one, and at one spot it is particularly so, for it lies
      for over a mile between Charlington Heath upon one side and the
      woods which lie round Charlington Hall upon the other. You could
      not find a more lonely tract of road anywhere, and it is quite
      rare to meet so much as a cart, or a peasant, until you reach the
      high road near Crooksbury Hill. Two weeks ago I was passing this
      place, when I chanced to look back over my shoulder, and about
      two hundred yards behind me I saw a man, also on a bicycle. He
      seemed to be a middle-aged man, with a short, dark beard. I
      looked back before I reached Farnham, but the man was gone, so I
      thought no more about it. But you can imagine how surprised I
      was, Mr. Holmes, when, on my return on the Monday, I saw the same
      man on the same stretch of road. My astonishment was increased
      when the incident occurred again, exactly as before, on the
      following Saturday and Monday. He always kept his distance and
      did not molest me in any way, but still it certainly was very
      odd. I mentioned it to Mr. Carruthers, who seemed interested in
      what I said, and told me that he had ordered a horse and trap, so
      that in future I should not pass over these lonely roads without
      some companion.

      “The horse and trap were to have come this week, but for some
      reason they were not delivered, and again I had to cycle to the
      station. That was this morning. You can think that I looked out
      when I came to Charlington Heath, and there, sure enough, was the
      man, exactly as he had been the two weeks before. He always kept
      so far from me that I could not clearly see his face, but it was
      certainly someone whom I did not know. He was dressed in a dark
      suit with a cloth cap. The only thing about his face that I could
      clearly see was his dark beard. To-day I was not alarmed, but I
      was filled with curiosity, and I determined to find out who he
      was and what he wanted. I slowed down my machine, but he slowed
      down his. Then I stopped altogether, but he stopped also. Then I
      laid a trap for him. There is a sharp turning of the road, and I
      pedalled very quickly round this, and then I stopped and waited.
      I expected him to shoot round and pass me before he could stop.
      But he never appeared. Then I went back and looked round the
      corner. I could see a mile of road, but he was not on it. To make
      it the more extraordinary, there was no side road at this point
      down which he could have gone.”

      Holmes chuckled and rubbed his hands. “This case certainly
      presents some features of its own,” said he. “How much time
      elapsed between your turning the corner and your discovery that
      the road was clear?”

      “Two or three minutes.”

      “Then he could not have retreated down the road, and you say that
      there are no side roads?”

      “None.”

      “Then he certainly took a footpath on one side or the other.”

      “It could not have been on the side of the heath, or I should
      have seen him.”

      “So, by the process of exclusion, we arrive at the fact that he
      made his way toward Charlington Hall, which, as I understand, is
      situated in its own grounds on one side of the road. Anything
      else?”

      “Nothing, Mr. Holmes, save that I was so perplexed that I felt I
      should not be happy until I had seen you and had your advice.”

      Holmes sat in silence for some little time.

      “Where is the gentleman to whom you are engaged?” he asked at
      last.

      “He is in the Midland Electrical Company, at Coventry.”

      “He would not pay you a surprise visit?”

      “Oh, Mr. Holmes! As if I should not know him!”

      “Have you had any other admirers?”

      “Several before I knew Cyril.”

      “And since?”

      “There was this dreadful man, Woodley, if you can call him an
      admirer.”

      “No one else?”

      Our fair client seemed a little confused.

      “Who was he?” asked Holmes.

      “Oh, it may be a mere fancy of mine; but it had seemed to me
      sometimes that my employer, Mr. Carruthers, takes a great deal of
      interest in me. We are thrown rather together. I play his
      accompaniments in the evening. He has never said anything. He is
      a perfect gentleman. But a girl always knows.”

      “Ha!” Holmes looked grave. “What does he do for a living?”

      “He is a rich man.”

      “No carriages or horses?”

      “Well, at least he is fairly well-to-do. But he goes into the
      city two or three times a week. He is deeply interested in South
      African gold shares.”

      “You will let me know any fresh development, Miss Smith. I am
      very busy just now, but I will find time to make some inquiries
      into your case. In the meantime, take no step without letting me
      know. Good-bye, and I trust that we shall have nothing but good
      news from you.”

      “It is part of the settled order of Nature that such a girl
      should have followers,” said Holmes, as he pulled at his
      meditative pipe, “but for choice not on bicycles in lonely
      country roads. Some secretive lover, beyond all doubt. But there
      are curious and suggestive details about the case, Watson.”

      “That he should appear only at that point?”

      “Exactly. Our first effort must be to find who are the tenants of
      Charlington Hall. Then, again, how about the connection between
      Carruthers and Woodley, since they appear to be men of such a
      different type? How came they _both_ to be so keen upon looking
      up Ralph Smith’s relations? One more point. What sort of a
      _ménage_ is it which pays double the market price for a governess
      but does not keep a horse, although six miles from the station?
      Odd, Watson—very odd!”

      “You will go down?”

      “No, my dear fellow, _you_ will go down. This may be some
      trifling intrigue, and I cannot break my other important research
      for the sake of it. On Monday you will arrive early at Farnham;
      you will conceal yourself near Charlington Heath; you will
      observe these facts for yourself, and act as your own judgment
      advises. Then, having inquired as to the occupants of the Hall,
      you will come back to me and report. And now, Watson, not another
      word of the matter until we have a few solid stepping-stones on
      which we may hope to get across to our solution.”

      We had ascertained from the lady that she went down upon the
      Monday by the train which leaves Waterloo at 9:50, so I started
      early and caught the 9:13. At Farnham Station I had no difficulty
      in being directed to Charlington Heath. It was impossible to
      mistake the scene of the young lady’s adventure, for the road
      runs between the open heath on one side and an old yew hedge upon
      the other, surrounding a park which is studded with magnificent
      trees. There was a main gateway of lichen-studded stone, each
      side pillar surmounted by mouldering heraldic emblems, but
      besides this central carriage drive I observed several points
      where there were gaps in the hedge and paths leading through
      them. The house was invisible from the road, but the surroundings
      all spoke of gloom and decay.

      The heath was covered with golden patches of flowering gorse,
      gleaming magnificently in the light of the bright spring
      sunshine. Behind one of these clumps I took up my position, so as
      to command both the gateway of the Hall and a long stretch of the
      road upon either side. It had been deserted when I left it, but
      now I saw a cyclist riding down it from the opposite direction to
      that in which I had come. He was clad in a dark suit, and I saw
      that he had a black beard. On reaching the end of the Charlington
      grounds, he sprang from his machine and led it through a gap in
      the hedge, disappearing from my view.

      A quarter of an hour passed, and then a second cyclist appeared.
      This time it was the young lady coming from the station. I saw
      her look about her as she came to the Charlington hedge. An
      instant later the man emerged from his hiding-place, sprang upon
      his cycle, and followed her. In all the broad landscape those
      were the only moving figures, the graceful girl sitting very
      straight upon her machine, and the man behind her bending low
      over his handle-bar with a curiously furtive suggestion in every
      movement. She looked back at him and slowed her pace. He slowed
      also. She stopped. He at once stopped, too, keeping two hundred
      yards behind her. Her next movement was as unexpected as it was
      spirited. She suddenly whisked her wheels round and dashed
      straight at him. He was as quick as she, however, and darted off
      in desperate flight. Presently she came back up the road again,
      her head haughtily in the air, not deigning to take any further
      notice of her silent attendant. He had turned also, and still
      kept his distance until the curve of the road hid them from my
      sight.

      I remained in my hiding-place, and it was well that I did so, for
      presently the man reappeared, cycling slowly back. He turned in
      at the Hall gates, and dismounted from his machine. For some
      minutes I could see him standing among the trees. His hands were
      raised, and he seemed to be settling his necktie. Then he mounted
      his cycle, and rode away from me down the drive towards the Hall.
      I ran across the heath and peered through the trees. Far away I
      could catch glimpses of the old grey building with its bristling
      Tudor chimneys, but the drive ran through a dense shrubbery, and
      I saw no more of my man.

      However, it seemed to me that I had done a fairly good morning’s
      work, and I walked back in high spirits to Farnham. The local
      house agent could tell me nothing about Charlington Hall, and
      referred me to a well-known firm in Pall Mall. There I halted on
      my way home, and met with courtesy from the representative. No, I
      could not have Charlington Hall for the summer. I was just too
      late. It had been let about a month ago. Mr. Williamson was the
      name of the tenant. He was a respectable, elderly gentleman. The
      polite agent was afraid he could say no more, as the affairs of
      his clients were not matters which he could discuss.

      Mr. Sherlock Holmes listened with attention to the long report
      which I was able to present to him that evening, but it did not
      elicit that word of curt praise which I had hoped for and should
      have valued. On the contrary, his austere face was even more
      severe than usual as he commented upon the things that I had done
      and the things that I had not.

      “Your hiding-place, my dear Watson, was very faulty. You should
      have been behind the hedge, then you would have had a close view
      of this interesting person. As it is, you were some hundreds of
      yards away and can tell me even less than Miss Smith. She thinks
      she does not know the man; I am convinced she does. Why,
      otherwise, should he be so desperately anxious that she should
      not get so near him as to see his features? You describe him as
      bending over the handle-bar. Concealment again, you see. You
      really have done remarkably badly. He returns to the house, and
      you want to find out who he is. You come to a London house
      agent!”

      “What should I have done?” I cried, with some heat.

      “Gone to the nearest public-house. That is the centre of country
      gossip. They would have told you every name, from the master to
      the scullery-maid. Williamson? It conveys nothing to my mind. If
      he is an elderly man he is not this active cyclist who sprints
      away from that young lady’s athletic pursuit. What have we gained
      by your expedition? The knowledge that the girl’s story is true.
      I never doubted it. That there is a connection between the
      cyclist and the Hall. I never doubted that either. That the Hall
      is tenanted by Williamson. Who’s the better for that? Well, well,
      my dear sir, don’t look so depressed. We can do little more until
      next Saturday, and in the meantime I may make one or two
      inquiries myself.”

      Next morning, we had a note from Miss Smith, recounting shortly
      and accurately the very incidents which I had seen, but the pith
      of the letter lay in the postscript:

      “I am sure that you will respect my confidence, Mr. Holmes, when
      I tell you that my place here has become difficult, owing to the
      fact that my employer has proposed marriage to me. I am convinced
      that his feelings are most deep and most honourable. At the same
      time, my promise is of course given. He took my refusal very
      seriously, but also very gently. You can understand, however,
      that the situation is a little strained.”

      “Our young friend seems to be getting into deep waters,” said
      Holmes, thoughtfully, as he finished the letter. “The case
      certainly presents more features of interest and more possibility
      of development than I had originally thought. I should be none
      the worse for a quiet, peaceful day in the country, and I am
      inclined to run down this afternoon and test one or two theories
      which I have formed.”

      Holmes’s quiet day in the country had a singular termination, for
      he arrived at Baker Street late in the evening, with a cut lip
      and a discoloured lump upon his forehead, besides a general air
      of dissipation which would have made his own person the fitting
      object of a Scotland Yard investigation. He was immensely tickled
      by his own adventures and laughed heartily as he recounted them.

      “I get so little active exercise that it is always a treat,” said
      he. “You are aware that I have some proficiency in the good old
      British sport of boxing. Occasionally, it is of service; to-day,
      for example, I should have come to very ignominious grief without
      it.”

      I begged him to tell me what had occurred.

      “I found that country pub which I had already recommended to your
      notice, and there I made my discreet inquiries. I was in the bar,
      and a garrulous landlord was giving me all that I wanted.
      Williamson is a white-bearded man, and he lives alone with a
      small staff of servants at the Hall. There is some rumour that he
      is or has been a clergyman, but one or two incidents of his short
      residence at the Hall struck me as peculiarly unecclesiastical. I
      have already made some inquiries at a clerical agency, and they
      tell me that there _was_ a man of that name in orders, whose
      career has been a singularly dark one. The landlord further
      informed me that there are usually week-end visitors—‘a warm lot,
      sir’—at the Hall, and especially one gentleman with a red
      moustache, Mr. Woodley by name, who was always there. We had got
      as far as this, when who should walk in but the gentleman
      himself, who had been drinking his beer in the tap-room and had
      heard the whole conversation. Who was I? What did I want? What
      did I mean by asking questions? He had a fine flow of language,
      and his adjectives were very vigorous. He ended a string of abuse
      by a vicious backhander, which I failed to entirely avoid. The
      next few minutes were delicious. It was a straight left against a
      slogging ruffian. I emerged as you see me. Mr. Woodley went home
      in a cart. So ended my country trip, and it must be confessed
      that, however enjoyable, my day on the Surrey border has not been
      much more profitable than your own.”

      The Thursday brought us another letter from our client.

          You will not be surprised, Mr. Holmes (said she), to hear
          that I am leaving Mr. Carruthers’s employment. Even the high
          pay cannot reconcile me to the discomforts of my situation.
          On Saturday I come up to town, and I do not intend to return.
          Mr. Carruthers has got a trap, and so the dangers of the
          lonely road, if there ever were any dangers, are now over.
      As to the special cause of my leaving, it is not merely the
      strained situation with Mr. Carruthers, but it is the
      reappearance of that odious man, Mr. Woodley. He was always
      hideous, but he looks more awful than ever now, for he appears to
      have had an accident and he is much disfigured. I saw him out of
      the window, but I am glad to say I did not meet him. He had a
      long talk with Mr. Carruthers, who seemed much excited
      afterwards. Woodley must be staying in the neighbourhood, for he
      did not sleep here, and yet I caught a glimpse of him again this
      morning, slinking about in the shrubbery. I would sooner have a
      savage wild animal loose about the place. I loathe and fear him
      more than I can say. How _can_ Mr. Carruthers endure such a
      creature for a moment? However, all my troubles will be over on
      Saturday.

      “So I trust, Watson, so I trust,” said Holmes, gravely. “There is
      some deep intrigue going on round that little woman, and it is
      our duty to see that no one molests her upon that last journey. I
      think, Watson, that we must spare time to run down together on
      Saturday morning and make sure that this curious and inclusive
      investigation has no untoward ending.”

      I confess that I had not up to now taken a very serious view of
      the case, which had seemed to me rather grotesque and bizarre
      than dangerous. That a man should lie in wait for and follow a
      very handsome woman is no unheard-of thing, and if he has so
      little audacity that he not only dared not address her, but even
      fled from her approach, he was not a very formidable assailant.
      The ruffian Woodley was a very different person, but, except on
      one occasion, he had not molested our client, and now he visited
      the house of Carruthers without intruding upon her presence. The
      man on the bicycle was doubtless a member of those week-end
      parties at the Hall of which the publican had spoken, but who he
      was, or what he wanted, was as obscure as ever. It was the
      severity of Holmes’s manner and the fact that he slipped a
      revolver into his pocket before leaving our rooms which impressed
      me with the feeling that tragedy might prove to lurk behind this
      curious train of events.

      A rainy night had been followed by a glorious morning, and the
      heath-covered countryside, with the glowing clumps of flowering
      gorse, seemed all the more beautiful to eyes which were weary of
      the duns and drabs and slate greys of London. Holmes and I walked
      along the broad, sandy road inhaling the fresh morning air and
      rejoicing in the music of the birds and the fresh breath of the
      spring. From a rise of the road on the shoulder of Crooksbury
      Hill, we could see the grim Hall bristling out from amidst the
      ancient oaks, which, old as they were, were still younger than
      the building which they surrounded. Holmes pointed down the long
      tract of road which wound, a reddish yellow band, between the
      brown of the heath and the budding green of the woods. Far away,
      a black dot, we could see a vehicle moving in our direction.
      Holmes gave an exclamation of impatience.

      “I have given a margin of half an hour,” said he. “If that is her
      trap, she must be making for the earlier train. I fear, Watson,
      that she will be past Charlington before we can possibly meet
      her.”

      From the instant that we passed the rise, we could no longer see
      the vehicle, but we hastened onward at such a pace that my
      sedentary life began to tell upon me, and I was compelled to fall
      behind. Holmes, however, was always in training, for he had
      inexhaustible stores of nervous energy upon which to draw. His
      springy step never slowed until suddenly, when he was a hundred
      yards in front of me, he halted, and I saw him throw up his hand
      with a gesture of grief and despair. At the same instant an empty
      dog-cart, the horse cantering, the reins trailing, appeared round
      the curve of the road and rattled swiftly towards us.

      “Too late, Watson, too late!” cried Holmes, as I ran panting to
      his side. “Fool that I was not to allow for that earlier train!
      It’s abduction, Watson—abduction! Murder! Heaven knows what!
      Block the road! Stop the horse! That’s right. Now, jump in, and
      let us see if I can repair the consequences of my own blunder.”

      We had sprung into the dog-cart, and Holmes, after turning the
      horse, gave it a sharp cut with the whip, and we flew back along
      the road. As we turned the curve, the whole stretch of road
      between the Hall and the heath was opened up. I grasped Holmes’s
      arm.

      “That’s the man!” I gasped.

      A solitary cyclist was coming towards us. His head was down and
      his shoulders rounded, as he put every ounce of energy that he
      possessed on to the pedals. He was flying like a racer. Suddenly
      he raised his bearded face, saw us close to him, and pulled up,
      springing from his machine. That coal-black beard was in singular
      contrast to the pallor of his face, and his eyes were as bright
      as if he had a fever. He stared at us and at the dog-cart. Then a
      look of amazement came over his face.

      “Halloa! Stop there!” he shouted, holding his bicycle to block
      our road. “Where did you get that dog-cart? Pull up, man!” he
      yelled, drawing a pistol from his side pocket. “Pull up, I say,
      or, by George, I’ll put a bullet into your horse.”

      Holmes threw the reins into my lap and sprang down from the cart.

      “You’re the man we want to see. Where is Miss Violet Smith?” he
      said, in his quick, clear way.

      “That’s what I’m asking you. You’re in her dog-cart. You ought to
      know where she is.”

      “We met the dog-cart on the road. There was no one in it. We
      drove back to help the young lady.”

      “Good Lord! Good Lord! What shall I do?” cried the stranger, in
      an ecstasy of despair. “They’ve got her, that hell-hound Woodley
      and the blackguard parson. Come, man, come, if you really are her
      friend. Stand by me and we’ll save her, if I have to leave my
      carcass in Charlington Wood.”

      He ran distractedly, his pistol in his hand, towards a gap in the
      hedge. Holmes followed him, and I, leaving the horse grazing
      beside the road, followed Holmes.

      “This is where they came through,” said he, pointing to the marks
      of several feet upon the muddy path. “Halloa! Stop a minute!
      Who’s this in the bush?”

      It was a young fellow about seventeen, dressed like an ostler,
      with leather cords and gaiters. He lay upon his back, his knees
      drawn up, a terrible cut upon his head. He was insensible, but
      alive. A glance at his wound told me that it had not penetrated
      the bone.

      “That’s Peter, the groom,” cried the stranger. “He drove her. The
      beasts have pulled him off and clubbed him. Let him lie; we can’t
      do him any good, but we may save her from the worst fate that can
      befall a woman.”

      We ran frantically down the path, which wound among the trees. We
      had reached the shrubbery which surrounded the house when Holmes
      pulled up.

      “They didn’t go to the house. Here are their marks on the
      left—here, beside the laurel bushes. Ah! I said so.”

      As he spoke, a woman’s shrill scream—a scream which vibrated with
      a frenzy of horror—burst from the thick, green clump of bushes in
      front of us. It ended suddenly on its highest note with a choke
      and a gurgle.

      “This way! This way! They are in the bowling-alley,” cried the
      stranger, darting through the bushes. “Ah, the cowardly dogs!
      Follow me, gentlemen! Too late! too late! by the living Jingo!”

      We had broken suddenly into a lovely glade of greensward
      surrounded by ancient trees. On the farther side of it, under the
      shadow of a mighty oak, there stood a singular group of three
      people. One was a woman, our client, drooping and faint, a
      handkerchief round her mouth. Opposite her stood a brutal,
      heavy-faced, red-moustached young man, his gaitered legs parted
      wide, one arm akimbo, the other waving a riding crop, his whole
      attitude suggestive of triumphant bravado. Between them an
      elderly, grey-bearded man, wearing a short surplice over a light
      tweed suit, had evidently just completed the wedding service, for
      he pocketed his prayer-book as we appeared, and slapped the
      sinister bridegroom upon the back in jovial congratulation.

      “They’re married!” I gasped.

      “Come on!” cried our guide, “come on!” He rushed across the
      glade, Holmes and I at his heels. As we approached, the lady
      staggered against the trunk of the tree for support. Williamson,
      the ex-clergyman, bowed to us with mock politeness, and the
      bully, Woodley, advanced with a shout of brutal and exultant
      laughter.

      “You can take your beard off, Bob,” said he. “I know you, right
      enough. Well, you and your pals have just come in time for me to
      be able to introduce you to Mrs. Woodley.”

      Our guide’s answer was a singular one. He snatched off the dark
      beard which had disguised him and threw it on the ground,
      disclosing a long, sallow, clean-shaven face below it. Then he
      raised his revolver and covered the young ruffian, who was
      advancing upon him with his dangerous riding-crop swinging in his
      hand.

      “Yes,” said our ally, “I _am_ Bob Carruthers, and I’ll see this
      woman righted, if I have to swing for it. I told you what I’d do
      if you molested her, and, by the Lord! I’ll be as good as my
      word.”

      “You’re too late. She’s my wife.”

      “No, she’s your widow.”

      His revolver cracked, and I saw the blood spurt from the front of
      Woodley’s waistcoat. He spun round with a scream and fell upon
      his back, his hideous red face turning suddenly to a dreadful
      mottled pallor. The old man, still clad in his surplice, burst
      into such a string of foul oaths as I have never heard, and
      pulled out a revolver of his own, but, before he could raise it,
      he was looking down the barrel of Holmes’s weapon.

      “Enough of this,” said my friend, coldly. “Drop that pistol!
      Watson, pick it up! Hold it to his head. Thank you. You,
      Carruthers, give me that revolver. We’ll have no more violence.
      Come, hand it over!”

      “Who are you, then?”

      “My name is Sherlock Holmes.”

      “Good Lord!”

      “You have heard of me, I see. I will represent the official
      police until their arrival. Here, you!” he shouted to a
      frightened groom, who had appeared at the edge of the glade.
      “Come here. Take this note as hard as you can ride to Farnham.”
      He scribbled a few words upon a leaf from his notebook. “Give it
      to the superintendent at the police-station. Until he comes, I
      must detain you all under my personal custody.”

      The strong, masterful personality of Holmes dominated the tragic
      scene, and all were equally puppets in his hands. Williamson and
      Carruthers found themselves carrying the wounded Woodley into the
      house, and I gave my arm to the frightened girl. The injured man
      was laid on his bed, and at Holmes’s request I examined him. I
      carried my report to where he sat in the old tapestry-hung
      dining-room with his two prisoners before him.

      “He will live,” said I.

      “What!” cried Carruthers, springing out of his chair. “I’ll go
      upstairs and finish him first. Do you tell me that that angel, is
      to be tied to Roaring Jack Woodley for life?”

      “You need not concern yourself about that,” said Holmes. “There
      are two very good reasons why she should, under no circumstances,
      be his wife. In the first place, we are very safe in questioning
      Mr. Williamson’s right to solemnize a marriage.”

      “I have been ordained,” cried the old rascal.

      “And also unfrocked.”

      “Once a clergyman, always a clergyman.”

      “I think not. How about the license?”

      “We had a license for the marriage. I have it here in my pocket.”

      “Then you got it by trick. But, in any case a forced marriage is
      no marriage, but it is a very serious felony, as you will
      discover before you have finished. You’ll have time to think the
      point out during the next ten years or so, unless I am mistaken.
      As to you, Carruthers, you would have done better to keep your
      pistol in your pocket.”

      “I begin to think so, Mr. Holmes, but when I thought of all the
      precaution I had taken to shield this girl—for I loved her, Mr.
      Holmes, and it is the only time that ever I knew what love was—it
      fairly drove me mad to think that she was in the power of the
      greatest brute and bully in South Africa—a man whose name is a
      holy terror from Kimberley to Johannesburg. Why, Mr. Holmes,
      you’ll hardly believe it, but ever since that girl has been in my
      employment I never once let her go past this house, where I knew
      the rascals were lurking, without following her on my bicycle,
      just to see that she came to no harm. I kept my distance from
      her, and I wore a beard, so that she should not recognize me, for
      she is a good and high-spirited girl, and she wouldn’t have
      stayed in my employment long if she had thought that I was
      following her about the country roads.”

      “Why didn’t you tell her of her danger?”

      “Because then, again, she would have left me, and I couldn’t bear
      to face that. Even if she couldn’t love me, it was a great deal
      to me just to see her dainty form about the house, and to hear
      the sound of her voice.”

      “Well,” said I, “you call that love, Mr. Carruthers, but I should
      call it selfishness.”

      “Maybe the two things go together. Anyhow, I couldn’t let her go.
      Besides, with this crowd about, it was well that she should have
      someone near to look after her. Then, when the cable came, I knew
      they were bound to make a move.”

      “What cable?”

      Carruthers took a telegram from his pocket.

      “That’s it,” said he.

      It was short and concise:

      The old man is dead.

      “Hum!” said Holmes. “I think I see how things worked, and I can
      understand how this message would, as you say, bring them to a
      head. But while you wait, you might tell me what you can.”

      The old reprobate with the surplice burst into a volley of bad
      language.

      “By heaven!” said he, “if you squeal on us, Bob Carruthers, I’ll
      serve you as you served Jack Woodley. You can bleat about the
      girl to your heart’s content, for that’s your own affair, but if
      you round on your pals to this plain-clothes copper, it will be
      the worst day’s work that ever you did.”

      “Your reverence need not be excited,” said Holmes, lighting a
      cigarette. “The case is clear enough against you, and all I ask
      is a few details for my private curiosity. However, if there’s
      any difficulty in your telling me, I’ll do the talking, and then
      you will see how far you have a chance of holding back your
      secrets. In the first place, three of you came from South Africa
      on this game—you Williamson, you Carruthers, and Woodley.”

      “Lie number one,” said the old man; “I never saw either of them
      until two months ago, and I have never been in Africa in my life,
      so you can put that in your pipe and smoke it, Mr. Busybody
      Holmes!”

      “What he says is true,” said Carruthers.

      “Well, well, two of you came over. His reverence is our own
      homemade article. You had known Ralph Smith in South Africa. You
      had reason to believe he would not live long. You found out that
      his niece would inherit his fortune. How’s that—eh?”

      Carruthers nodded and Williamson swore.

      “She was next of kin, no doubt, and you were aware that the old
      fellow would make no will.”

      “Couldn’t read or write,” said Carruthers.

      “So you came over, the two of you, and hunted up the girl. The
      idea was that one of you was to marry her, and the other have a
      share of the plunder. For some reason, Woodley was chosen as the
      husband. Why was that?”

      “We played cards for her on the voyage. He won.”

      “I see. You got the young lady into your service, and there
      Woodley was to do the courting. She recognized the drunken brute
      that he was, and would have nothing to do with him. Meanwhile,
      your arrangement was rather upset by the fact that you had
      yourself fallen in love with the lady. You could no longer bear
      the idea of this ruffian owning her?”

      “No, by George, I couldn’t!”

      “There was a quarrel between you. He left you in a rage, and
      began to make his own plans independently of you.”

      “It strikes me, Williamson, there isn’t very much that we can
      tell this gentleman,” cried Carruthers, with a bitter laugh.
      “Yes, we quarreled, and he knocked me down. I am level with him
      on that, anyhow. Then I lost sight of him. That was when he
      picked up with this outcast padre here. I found that they had set
      up housekeeping together at this place on the line that she had
      to pass for the station. I kept my eye on her after that, for I
      knew there was some devilry in the wind. I saw them from time to
      time, for I was anxious to know what they were after. Two days
      ago Woodley came up to my house with this cable, which showed
      that Ralph Smith was dead. He asked me if I would stand by the
      bargain. I said I would not. He asked me if I would marry the
      girl myself and give him a share. I said I would willingly do so,
      but that she would not have me. He said, ‘Let us get her married
      first and after a week or two she may see things a bit
      different.’ I said I would have nothing to do with violence. So
      he went off cursing, like the foul-mouthed blackguard that he
      was, and swearing that he would have her yet. She was leaving me
      this week-end, and I had got a trap to take her to the station,
      but I was so uneasy in my mind that I followed her on my bicycle.
      She had got a start, however, and before I could catch her, the
      mischief was done. The first thing I knew about it was when I saw
      you two gentlemen driving back in her dog-cart.”

      Holmes rose and tossed the end of his cigarette into the grate.
      “I have been very obtuse, Watson,” said he. “When in your report
      you said that you had seen the cyclist as you thought arrange his
      necktie in the shrubbery, that alone should have told me all.
      However, we may congratulate ourselves upon a curious and, in
      some respects, a unique case. I perceive three of the county
      constabulary in the drive, and I am glad to see that the little
      ostler is able to keep pace with them, so it is likely that
      neither he nor the interesting bridegroom will be permanently
      damaged by their morning’s adventures. I think, Watson, that in
      your medical capacity, you might wait upon Miss Smith and tell
      her that if she is sufficiently recovered, we shall be happy to
      escort her to her mother’s home. If she is not quite convalescent
      you will find that a hint that we were about to telegraph to a
      young electrician in the Midlands would probably complete the
      cure. As to you, Mr. Carruthers, I think that you have done what
      you could to make amends for your share in an evil plot. There is
      my card, sir, and if my evidence can be of help in your trial, it
      shall be at your disposal.”

      In the whirl of our incessant activity, it has often been
      difficult for me, as the reader has probably observed, to round
      off my narratives, and to give those final details which the
      curious might expect. Each case has been the prelude to another,
      and the crisis once over, the actors have passed for ever out of
      our busy lives. I find, however, a short note at the end of my
      manuscript dealing with this case, in which I have put it upon
      record that Miss Violet Smith did indeed inherit a large fortune,
      and that she is now the wife of Cyril Morton, the senior partner
      of Morton & Kennedy, the famous Westminster electricians.
      Williamson and Woodley were both tried for abduction and assault,
      the former getting seven years and the latter ten. Of the fate of
      Carruthers, I have no record, but I am sure that his assault was
      not viewed very gravely by the court, since Woodley had the
      reputation of being a most dangerous ruffian, and I think that a
      few months were sufficient to satisfy the demands of justice.




THE ADVENTURE OF THE PRIORY SCHOOL


      We have had some dramatic entrances and exits upon our small
      stage at Baker Street, but I cannot recollect anything more
      sudden and startling than the first appearance of Thorneycroft
      Huxtable, M.A., Ph.D., etc. His card, which seemed too small to
      carry the weight of his academic distinctions, preceded him by a
      few seconds, and then he entered himself—so large, so pompous,
      and so dignified that he was the very embodiment of
      self-possession and solidity. And yet his first action, when the
      door had closed behind him, was to stagger against the table,
      whence he slipped down upon the floor, and there was that
      majestic figure prostrate and insensible upon our bearskin
      hearth-rug.

      We had sprung to our feet, and for a few moments we stared in
      silent amazement at this ponderous piece of wreckage, which told
      of some sudden and fatal storm far out on the ocean of life. Then
      Holmes hurried with a cushion for his head, and I with brandy for
      his lips. The heavy, white face was seamed with lines of trouble,
      the hanging pouches under the closed eyes were leaden in colour,
      the loose mouth drooped dolorously at the corners, the rolling
      chins were unshaven. Collar and shirt bore the grime of a long
      journey, and the hair bristled unkempt from the well-shaped head.
      It was a sorely stricken man who lay before us.

      “What is it, Watson?” asked Holmes.

      “Absolute exhaustion—possibly mere hunger and fatigue,” said I,
      with my finger on the thready pulse, where the stream of life
      trickled thin and small.

      “Return ticket from Mackleton, in the north of England,” said
      Holmes, drawing it from the watch-pocket. “It is not twelve
      o’clock yet. He has certainly been an early starter.”

      The puckered eyelids had begun to quiver, and now a pair of
      vacant grey eyes looked up at us. An instant later the man had
      scrambled on to his feet, his face crimson with shame.

      “Forgive this weakness, Mr. Holmes, I have been a little
      overwrought. Thank you, if I might have a glass of milk and a
      biscuit, I have no doubt that I should be better. I came
      personally, Mr. Holmes, in order to insure that you would return
      with me. I feared that no telegram would convince you of the
      absolute urgency of the case.”

      “When you are quite restored——”

      “I am quite well again. I cannot imagine how I came to be so
      weak. I wish you, Mr. Holmes, to come to Mackleton with me by the
      next train.”

      My friend shook his head.

      “My colleague, Dr. Watson, could tell you that we are very busy
      at present. I am retained in this case of the Ferrers Documents,
      and the Abergavenny murder is coming up for trial. Only a very
      important issue could call me from London at present.”

      “Important!” Our visitor threw up his hands. “Have you heard
      nothing of the abduction of the only son of the Duke of
      Holdernesse?”

      “What! the late Cabinet Minister?”

      “Exactly. We had tried to keep it out of the papers, but there
      was some rumour in the _Globe_ last night. I thought it might
      have reached your ears.”

      Holmes shot out his long, thin arm and picked out Volume “H” in
      his encyclopædia of reference.

      “‘Holdernesse, 6th Duke, K.G., P.C.’—half the alphabet! ‘Baron
      Beverley, Earl of Carston’—dear me, what a list! ‘Lord Lieutenant
      of Hallamshire since 1900. Married Edith, daughter of Sir Charles
      Appledore, 1888. Heir and only child, Lord Saltire. Owns about
      two hundred and fifty thousand acres. Minerals in Lancashire and
      Wales. Address: Carlton House Terrace; Holdernesse Hall,
      Hallamshire; Carston Castle, Bangor, Wales. Lord of the
      Admiralty, 1872; Chief Secretary of State for——’ Well, well, this
      man is certainly one of the greatest subjects of the Crown!”

      “The greatest and perhaps the wealthiest. I am aware, Mr. Holmes,
      that you take a very high line in professional matters, and that
      you are prepared to work for the work’s sake. I may tell you,
      however, that his Grace has already intimated that a check for
      five thousand pounds will be handed over to the person who can
      tell him where his son is, and another thousand to him who can
      name the man or men who have taken him.”

      “It is a princely offer,” said Holmes. “Watson, I think that we
      shall accompany Dr. Huxtable back to the north of England. And
      now, Dr. Huxtable, when you have consumed that milk, you will
      kindly tell me what has happened, when it happened, how it
      happened, and, finally, what Dr. Thorneycroft Huxtable, of the
      Priory School, near Mackleton, has to do with the matter, and why
      he comes three days after an event—the state of your chin gives
      the date—to ask for my humble services.”

      Our visitor had consumed his milk and biscuits. The light had
      come back to his eyes and the colour to his cheeks, as he set
      himself with great vigour and lucidity to explain the situation.

      “I must inform you, gentlemen, that the Priory is a preparatory
      school, of which I am the founder and principal. _Huxtable’s
      Sidelights on Horace_ may possibly recall my name to your
      memories. The Priory is, without exception, the best and most
      select preparatory school in England. Lord Leverstoke, the Earl
      of Blackwater, Sir Cathcart Soames—they all have intrusted their
      sons to me. But I felt that my school had reached its zenith
      when, weeks ago, the Duke of Holdernesse sent Mr. James Wilder,
      his secretary, with intimation that young Lord Saltire, ten years
      old, his only son and heir, was about to be committed to my
      charge. Little did I think that this would be the prelude to the
      most crushing misfortune of my life.

      “On May 1st the boy arrived, that being the beginning of the
      summer term. He was a charming youth, and he soon fell into our
      ways. I may tell you—I trust that I am not indiscreet, but
      half-confidences are absurd in such a case—that he was not
      entirely happy at home. It is an open secret that the Duke’s
      married life had not been a peaceful one, and the matter had
      ended in a separation by mutual consent, the Duchess taking up
      her residence in the south of France. This had occurred very
      shortly before, and the boy’s sympathies are known to have been
      strongly with his mother. He moped after her departure from
      Holdernesse Hall, and it was for this reason that the Duke
      desired to send him to my establishment. In a fortnight the boy
      was quite at home with us and was apparently absolutely happy.

      “He was last seen on the night of May 13th—that is, the night of
      last Monday. His room was on the second floor and was approached
      through another larger room, in which two boys were sleeping.
      These boys saw and heard nothing, so that it is certain that
      young Saltire did not pass out that way. His window was open, and
      there is a stout ivy plant leading to the ground. We could trace
      no footmarks below, but it is sure that this is the only possible
      exit.

      “His absence was discovered at seven o’clock on Tuesday morning.
      His bed had been slept in. He had dressed himself fully, before
      going off, in his usual school suit of black Eton jacket and dark
      grey trousers. There were no signs that anyone had entered the
      room, and it is quite certain that anything in the nature of
      cries or a struggle would have been heard, since Caunter, the
      elder boy in the inner room, is a very light sleeper.

      “When Lord Saltire’s disappearance was discovered, I at once
      called a roll of the whole establishment—boys, masters, and
      servants. It was then that we ascertained that Lord Saltire had
      not been alone in his flight. Heidegger, the German master, was
      missing. His room was on the second floor, at the farther end of
      the building, facing the same way as Lord Saltire’s. His bed had
      also been slept in, but he had apparently gone away partly
      dressed, since his shirt and socks were lying on the floor. He
      had undoubtedly let himself down by the ivy, for we could see the
      marks of his feet where he had landed on the lawn. His bicycle
      was kept in a small shed beside this lawn, and it also was gone.

      “He had been with me for two years, and came with the best
      references, but he was a silent, morose man, not very popular
      either with masters or boys. No trace could be found of the
      fugitives, and now, on Thursday morning, we are as ignorant as we
      were on Tuesday. Inquiry was, of course, made at once at
      Holdernesse Hall. It is only a few miles away, and we imagined
      that, in some sudden attack of homesickness, he had gone back to
      his father, but nothing had been heard of him. The Duke is
      greatly agitated, and, as to me, you have seen yourselves the
      state of nervous prostration to which the suspense and the
      responsibility have reduced me. Mr. Holmes, if ever you put
      forward your full powers, I implore you to do so now, for never
      in your life could you have a case which is more worthy of them.”

      Sherlock Holmes had listened with the utmost intentness to the
      statement of the unhappy schoolmaster. His drawn brows and the
      deep furrow between them showed that he needed no exhortation to
      concentrate all his attention upon a problem which, apart from
      the tremendous interests involved must appeal so directly to his
      love of the complex and the unusual. He now drew out his notebook
      and jotted down one or two memoranda.

      “You have been very remiss in not coming to me sooner,” said he,
      severely. “You start me on my investigation with a very serious
      handicap. It is inconceivable, for example, that this ivy and
      this lawn would have yielded nothing to an expert observer.”

      “I am not to blame, Mr. Holmes. His Grace was extremely desirous
      to avoid all public scandal. He was afraid of his family
      unhappiness being dragged before the world. He has a deep horror
      of anything of the kind.”

      “But there has been some official investigation?”

      “Yes, sir, and it has proved most disappointing. An apparent clue
      was at once obtained, since a boy and a young man were reported
      to have been seen leaving a neighbouring station by an early
      train. Only last night we had news that the couple had been
      hunted down in Liverpool, and they prove to have no connection
      whatever with the matter in hand. Then it was that in my despair
      and disappointment, after a sleepless night, I came straight to
      you by the early train.”

      “I suppose the local investigation was relaxed while this false
      clue was being followed up?”

      “It was entirely dropped.”

      “So that three days have been wasted. The affair has been most
      deplorably handled.”

      “I feel it and admit it.”

      “And yet the problem should be capable of ultimate solution. I
      shall be very happy to look into it. Have you been able to trace
      any connection between the missing boy and this German master?”

      “None at all.”

      “Was he in the master’s class?”

      “No, he never exchanged a word with him, so far as I know.”

      “That is certainly very singular. Had the boy a bicycle?”

      “No.”

      “Was any other bicycle missing?”

      “No.”

      “Is that certain?”

      “Quite.”

      “Well, now, you do not mean to seriously suggest that this German
      rode off upon a bicycle in the dead of the night, bearing the boy
      in his arms?”

      “Certainly not.”

      “Then what is the theory in your mind?”

      “The bicycle may have been a blind. It may have been hidden
      somewhere, and the pair gone off on foot.”

      “Quite so, but it seems rather an absurd blind, does it not? Were
      there other bicycles in this shed?”

      “Several.”

      “Would he not have hidden _a couple_, had he desired to give the
      idea that they had gone off upon them?”

      “I suppose he would.”

      “Of course he would. The blind theory won’t do. But the incident
      is an admirable starting-point for an investigation. After all, a
      bicycle is not an easy thing to conceal or to destroy. One other
      question. Did anyone call to see the boy on the day before he
      disappeared?”

      “No.”

      “Did he get any letters?”

      “Yes, one letter.”

      “From whom?”

      “From his father.”

      “Do you open the boys’ letters?”

      “No.”

      “How do you know it was from the father?”

      “The coat of arms was on the envelope, and it was addressed in
      the Duke’s peculiar stiff hand. Besides, the Duke remembers
      having written.”

      “When had he a letter before that?”

      “Not for several days.”

      “Had he ever one from France?”

      “No, never.”

      “You see the point of my questions, of course. Either the boy was
      carried off by force or he went of his own free will. In the
      latter case, you would expect that some prompting from outside
      would be needed to make so young a lad do such a thing. If he has
      had no visitors, that prompting must have come in letters; hence
      I try to find out who were his correspondents.”

      “I fear I cannot help you much. His only correspondent, so far as
      I know, was his own father.”

      “Who wrote to him on the very day of his disappearance. Were the
      relations between father and son very friendly?”

      “His Grace is never very friendly with anyone. He is completely
      immersed in large public questions, and is rather inaccessible to
      all ordinary emotions. But he was always kind to the boy in his
      own way.”

      “But the sympathies of the latter were with the mother?”

      “Yes.”

      “Did he say so?”

      “No.”

      “The Duke, then?”

      “Good Heavens, no!”

      “Then how could you know?”

      “I have had some confidential talks with Mr. James Wilder, his
      Grace’s secretary. It was he who gave me the information about
      Lord Saltire’s feelings.”

      “I see. By the way, that last letter of the Duke’s—was it found
      in the boy’s room after he was gone?”

      “No, he had taken it with him. I think, Mr. Holmes, it is time
      that we were leaving for Euston.”

      “I will order a four-wheeler. In a quarter of an hour, we shall
      be at your service. If you are telegraphing home, Mr. Huxtable,
      it would be well to allow the people in your neighbourhood to
      imagine that the inquiry is still going on in Liverpool, or
      wherever else that red herring led your pack. In the meantime I
      will do a little quiet work at your own doors, and perhaps the
      scent is not so cold but that two old hounds like Watson and
      myself may get a sniff of it.”

      That evening found us in the cold, bracing atmosphere of the Peak
      country, in which Dr. Huxtable’s famous school is situated. It
      was already dark when we reached it. A card was lying on the hall
      table, and the butler whispered something to his master, who
      turned to us with agitation in every heavy feature.

      “The Duke is here,” said he. “The Duke and Mr. Wilder are in the
      study. Come, gentlemen, and I will introduce you.”

      I was, of course, familiar with the pictures of the famous
      statesman, but the man himself was very different from his
      representation. He was a tall and stately person, scrupulously
      dressed, with a drawn, thin face, and a nose which was
      grotesquely curved and long. His complexion was of a dead pallor,
      which was more startling by contrast with a long, dwindling beard
      of vivid red, which flowed down over his white waistcoat with his
      watch-chain gleaming through its fringe. Such was the stately
      presence who looked stonily at us from the centre of Dr.
      Huxtable’s hearthrug. Beside him stood a very young man, whom I
      understood to be Wilder, the private secretary. He was small,
      nervous, alert with intelligent light-blue eyes and mobile
      features. It was he who at once, in an incisive and positive
      tone, opened the conversation.

      “I called this morning, Dr. Huxtable, too late to prevent you
      from starting for London. I learned that your object was to
      invite Mr. Sherlock Holmes to undertake the conduct of this case.
      His Grace is surprised, Dr. Huxtable, that you should have taken
      such a step without consulting him.”

      “When I learned that the police had failed——”

      “His Grace is by no means convinced that the police have failed.”

      “But surely, Mr. Wilder——”

      “You are well aware, Dr. Huxtable, that his Grace is particularly
      anxious to avoid all public scandal. He prefers to take as few
      people as possible into his confidence.”

      “The matter can be easily remedied,” said the brow-beaten doctor;
      “Mr. Sherlock Holmes can return to London by the morning train.”

      “Hardly that, Doctor, hardly that,” said Holmes, in his blandest
      voice. “This northern air is invigorating and pleasant, so I
      propose to spend a few days upon your moors, and to occupy my
      mind as best I may. Whether I have the shelter of your roof or of
      the village inn is, of course, for you to decide.”

      I could see that the unfortunate doctor was in the last stage of
      indecision, from which he was rescued by the deep, sonorous voice
      of the red-bearded Duke, which boomed out like a dinner-gong.

      “I agree with Mr. Wilder, Dr. Huxtable, that you would have done
      wisely to consult me. But since Mr. Holmes has already been taken
      into your confidence, it would indeed be absurd that we should
      not avail ourselves of his services. Far from going to the inn,
      Mr. Holmes, I should be pleased if you would come and stay with
      me at Holdernesse Hall.”

      “I thank your Grace. For the purposes of my investigation, I
      think that it would be wiser for me to remain at the scene of the
      mystery.”

      “Just as you like, Mr. Holmes. Any information which Mr. Wilder
      or I can give you is, of course, at your disposal.”

      “It will probably be necessary for me to see you at the Hall,”
      said Holmes. “I would only ask you now, sir, whether you have
      formed any explanation in your own mind as to the mysterious
      disappearance of your son?”

      “No, sir, I have not.”

      “Excuse me if I allude to that which is painful to you, but I
      have no alternative. Do you think that the Duchess had anything
      to do with the matter?”

      The great minister showed perceptible hesitation.

      “I do not think so,” he said, at last.

      “The other most obvious explanation is that the child has been
      kidnapped for the purpose of levying ransom. You have not had any
      demand of the sort?”

      “No, sir.”

      “One more question, your Grace. I understand that you wrote to
      your son upon the day when this incident occurred.”

      “No, I wrote upon the day before.”

      “Exactly. But he received it on that day?”

      “Yes.”

      “Was there anything in your letter which might have unbalanced
      him or induced him to take such a step?”

      “No, sir, certainly not.”

      “Did you post that letter yourself?”

      The nobleman’s reply was interrupted by his secretary, who broke
      in with some heat.

      “His Grace is not in the habit of posting letters himself,” said
      he. “This letter was laid with others upon the study table, and I
      myself put them in the post-bag.”

      “You are sure this one was among them?”

      “Yes, I observed it.”

      “How many letters did your Grace write that day?”

      “Twenty or thirty. I have a large correspondence. But surely this
      is somewhat irrelevant?”

      “Not entirely,” said Holmes.

      “For my own part,” the Duke continued, “I have advised the police
      to turn their attention to the south of France. I have already
      said that I do not believe that the Duchess would encourage so
      monstrous an action, but the lad had the most wrong-headed
      opinions, and it is possible that he may have fled to her, aided
      and abetted by this German. I think, Dr. Huxtable, that we will
      now return to the Hall.”

      I could see that there were other questions which Holmes would
      have wished to put, but the nobleman’s abrupt manner showed that
      the interview was at an end. It was evident that to his intensely
      aristocratic nature this discussion of his intimate family
      affairs with a stranger was most abhorrent, and that he feared
      lest every fresh question would throw a fiercer light into the
      discreetly shadowed corners of his ducal history.

      When the nobleman and his secretary had left, my friend flung
      himself at once with characteristic eagerness into the
      investigation.

      The boy’s chamber was carefully examined, and yielded nothing
      save the absolute conviction that it was only through the window
      that he could have escaped. The German master’s room and effects
      gave no further clue. In his case a trailer of ivy had given way
      under his weight, and we saw by the light of a lantern the mark
      on the lawn where his heels had come down. That one dint in the
      short, green grass was the only material witness left of this
      inexplicable nocturnal flight.

      Sherlock Holmes left the house alone, and only returned after
      eleven. He had obtained a large ordnance map of the
      neighbourhood, and this he brought into my room, where he laid it
      out on the bed, and, having balanced the lamp in the middle of
      it, he began to smoke over it, and occasionally to point out
      objects of interest with the reeking amber of his pipe.

      “This case grows upon me, Watson,” said he. “There are decidedly
      some points of interest in connection with it. In this early
      stage, I want you to realize those geographical features which
      may have a good deal to do with our investigation.

      Holmes'-map

      HOLMES’ MAP OF THE NEIGHBOURHOOD OF THE SCHOOL.

      “Look at this map. This dark square is the Priory School. I’ll
      put a pin in it. Now, this line is the main road. You see that it
      runs east and west past the school, and you see also that there
      is no side road for a mile either way. If these two folk passed
      away by road, it was _this_ road.”

      “Exactly.”

      “By a singular and happy chance, we are able to some extent to
      check what passed along this road during the night in question.
      At this point, where my pipe is now resting, a county constable
      was on duty from twelve to six. It is, as you perceive, the first
      cross-road on the east side. This man declares that he was not
      absent from his post for an instant, and he is positive that
      neither boy nor man could have gone that way unseen. I have
      spoken with this policeman to-night and he appears to me to be a
      perfectly reliable person. That blocks this end. We have now to
      deal with the other. There is an inn here, the Red Bull, the
      landlady of which was ill. She had sent to Mackleton for a
      doctor, but he did not arrive until morning, being absent at
      another case. The people at the inn were alert all night,
      awaiting his coming, and one or other of them seems to have
      continually had an eye upon the road. They declare that no one
      passed. If their evidence is good, then we are fortunate enough
      to be able to block the west, and also to be able to say that the
      fugitives did _not_ use the road at all.”

      “But the bicycle?” I objected.

      “Quite so. We will come to the bicycle presently. To continue our
      reasoning: if these people did not go by the road, they must have
      traversed the country to the north of the house or to the south
      of the house. That is certain. Let us weigh the one against the
      other. On the south of the house is, as you perceive, a large
      district of arable land, cut up into small fields, with stone
      walls between them. There, I admit that a bicycle is impossible.
      We can dismiss the idea. We turn to the country on the north.
      Here there lies a grove of trees, marked as the ‘Ragged Shaw,’
      and on the farther side stretches a great rolling moor, Lower
      Gill Moor, extending for ten miles and sloping gradually upward.
      Here, at one side of this wilderness, is Holdernesse Hall, ten
      miles by road, but only six across the moor. It is a peculiarly
      desolate plain. A few moor farmers have small holdings, where
      they rear sheep and cattle. Except these, the plover and the
      curlew are the only inhabitants until you come to the
      Chesterfield high road. There is a church there, you see, a few
      cottages, and an inn. Beyond that the hills become precipitous.
      Surely it is here to the north that our quest must lie.”

      “But the bicycle?” I persisted.

      “Well, well!” said Holmes, impatiently. “A good cyclist does not
      need a high road. The moor is intersected with paths, and the
      moon was at the full. Halloa! what is this?”

      There was an agitated knock at the door, and an instant
      afterwards Dr. Huxtable was in the room. In his hand he held a
      blue cricket-cap with a white chevron on the peak.

      “At last we have a clue!” he cried. “Thank heaven! at last we are
      on the dear boy’s track! It is his cap.”

      “Where was it found?”

      “In the van of the gipsies who camped on the moor. They left on
      Tuesday. To-day the police traced them down and examined their
      caravan. This was found.”

      “How do they account for it?”

      “They shuffled and lied—said that they found it on the moor on
      Tuesday morning. They know where he is, the rascals! Thank
      goodness, they are all safe under lock and key. Either the fear
      of the law or the Duke’s purse will certainly get out of them all
      that they know.”

      “So far, so good,” said Holmes, when the doctor had at last left
      the room. “It at least bears out the theory that it is on the
      side of the Lower Gill Moor that we must hope for results. The
      police have really done nothing locally, save the arrest of these
      gipsies. Look here, Watson! There is a watercourse across the
      moor. You see it marked here in the map. In some parts it widens
      into a morass. This is particularly so in the region between
      Holdernesse Hall and the school. It is vain to look elsewhere for
      tracks in this dry weather, but at _that_ point there is
      certainly a chance of some record being left. I will call you
      early to-morrow morning, and you and I will try if we can throw
      some little light upon the mystery.”

      The day was just breaking when I woke to find the long, thin form
      of Holmes by my bedside. He was fully dressed, and had apparently
      already been out.

      “I have done the lawn and the bicycle shed,” said he. “I have
      also had a rumble through the Ragged Shaw. Now, Watson, there is
      cocoa ready in the next room. I must beg you to hurry, for we
      have a great day before us.”

      His eyes shone, and his cheek was flushed with the exhilaration
      of the master workman who sees his work lie ready before him. A
      very different Holmes, this active, alert man, from the
      introspective and pallid dreamer of Baker Street. I felt, as I
      looked upon that supple figure, alive with nervous energy, that
      it was indeed a strenuous day that awaited us.

      And yet it opened in the blackest disappointment. With high hopes
      we struck across the peaty, russet moor, intersected with a
      thousand sheep paths, until we came to the broad, light-green
      belt which marked the morass between us and Holdernesse.
      Certainly, if the lad had gone homeward, he must have passed
      this, and he could not pass it without leaving his traces. But no
      sign of him or the German could be seen. With a darkening face my
      friend strode along the margin, eagerly observant of every muddy
      stain upon the mossy surface. Sheep-marks there were in
      profusion, and at one place, some miles down, cows had left their
      tracks. Nothing more.

      “Check number one,” said Holmes, looking gloomily over the
      rolling expanse of the moor. “There is another morass down
      yonder, and a narrow neck between. Halloa! halloa! halloa! what
      have we here?”

      We had come on a small black ribbon of pathway. In the middle of
      it, clearly marked on the sodden soil, was the track of a
      bicycle.

      “Hurrah!” I cried. “We have it.”

      But Holmes was shaking his head, and his face was puzzled and
      expectant rather than joyous.

      “A bicycle, certainly, but not _the_ bicycle,” said he. “I am
      familiar with forty-two different impressions left by tires.
      This, as you perceive, is a Dunlop, with a patch upon the outer
      cover. Heidegger’s tires were Palmer’s, leaving longitudinal
      stripes. Aveling, the mathematical master, was sure upon the
      point. Therefore, it is not Heidegger’s track.”

      “The boy’s, then?”

      “Possibly, if we could prove a bicycle to have been in his
      possession. But this we have utterly failed to do. This track, as
      you perceive, was made by a rider who was going from the
      direction of the school.”

      “Or towards it?”

      “No, no, my dear Watson. The more deeply sunk impression is, of
      course, the hind wheel, upon which the weight rests. You perceive
      several places where it has passed across and obliterated the
      more shallow mark of the front one. It was undoubtedly heading
      away from the school. It may or may not be connected with our
      inquiry, but we will follow it backwards before we go any
      farther.”

      We did so, and at the end of a few hundred yards lost the tracks
      as we emerged from the boggy portion of the moor. Following the
      path backwards, we picked out another spot, where a spring
      trickled across it. Here, once again, was the mark of the
      bicycle, though nearly obliterated by the hoofs of cows. After
      that there was no sign, but the path ran right on into Ragged
      Shaw, the wood which backed on to the school. From this wood the
      cycle must have emerged. Holmes sat down on a boulder and rested
      his chin in his hands. I had smoked two cigarettes before he
      moved.

      “Well, well,” said he, at last. “It is, of course, possible that
      a cunning man might change the tires of his bicycle in order to
      leave unfamiliar tracks. A criminal who was capable of such a
      thought is a man whom I should be proud to do business with. We
      will leave this question undecided and hark back to our morass
      again, for we have left a good deal unexplored.”

      We continued our systematic survey of the edge of the sodden
      portion of the moor, and soon our perseverance was gloriously
      rewarded. Right across the lower part of the bog lay a miry path.
      Holmes gave a cry of delight as he approached it. An impression
      like a fine bundle of telegraph wires ran down the centre of it.
      It was the Palmer tires.

      “Here is Herr Heidegger, sure enough!” cried Holmes, exultantly.
      “My reasoning seems to have been pretty sound, Watson.”

      “I congratulate you.”

      “But we have a long way still to go. Kindly walk clear of the
      path. Now let us follow the trail. I fear that it will not lead
      very far.”

      We found, however, as we advanced that this portion of the moor
      is intersected with soft patches, and, though we frequently lost
      sight of the track, we always succeeded in picking it up once
      more.

      “Do you observe,” said Holmes, “that the rider is now undoubtedly
      forcing the pace? There can be no doubt of it. Look at this
      impression, where you get both tires clear. The one is as deep as
      the other. That can only mean that the rider is throwing his
      weight on to the handle-bar, as a man does when he is sprinting.
      By Jove! he has had a fall.”

      There was a broad, irregular smudge covering some yards of the
      track. Then there were a few footmarks, and the tire reappeared
      once more.

      “A side-slip,” I suggested.

      Holmes held up a crumpled branch of flowering gorse. To my horror
      I perceived that the yellow blossoms were all dabbled with
      crimson. On the path, too, and among the heather were dark stains
      of clotted blood.

      “Bad!” said Holmes. “Bad! Stand clear, Watson! Not an unnecessary
      footstep! What do I read here? He fell wounded—he stood up—he
      remounted—he proceeded. But there is no other track. Cattle on
      this side path. He was surely not gored by a bull? Impossible!
      But I see no traces of anyone else. We must push on, Watson.
      Surely, with stains as well as the track to guide us, he cannot
      escape us now.”

      Our search was not a very long one. The tracks of the tire began
      to curve fantastically upon the wet and shining path. Suddenly,
      as I looked ahead, the gleam of metal caught my eye from amid the
      thick gorse-bushes. Out of them we dragged a bicycle,
      Palmer-tired, one pedal bent, and the whole front of it horribly
      smeared and slobbered with blood. On the other side of the bushes
      a shoe was projecting. We ran round, and there lay the
      unfortunate rider. He was a tall man, full-bearded, with
      spectacles, one glass of which had been knocked out. The cause of
      his death was a frightful blow upon the head, which had crushed
      in part of his skull. That he could have gone on after receiving
      such an injury said much for the vitality and courage of the man.
      He wore shoes, but no socks, and his open coat disclosed a
      nightshirt beneath it. It was undoubtedly the German master.

      Holmes turned the body over reverently, and examined it with
      great attention. He then sat in deep thought for a time, and I
      could see by his ruffled brow that this grim discovery had not,
      in his opinion, advanced us much in our inquiry.

      “It is a little difficult to know what to do, Watson,” said he,
      at last. “My own inclinations are to push this inquiry on, for we
      have already lost so much time that we cannot afford to waste
      another hour. On the other hand, we are bound to inform the
      police of the discovery, and to see that this poor fellow’s body
      is looked after.”

      “I could take a note back.”

      “But I need your company and assistance. Wait a bit! There is a
      fellow cutting peat up yonder. Bring him over here, and he will
      guide the police.”

      I brought the peasant across, and Holmes dispatched the
      frightened man with a note to Dr. Huxtable.

      “Now, Watson,” said he, “we have picked up two clues this
      morning. One is the bicycle with the Palmer tire, and we see what
      that has led to. The other is the bicycle with the patched
      Dunlop. Before we start to investigate that, let us try to
      realize what we _do_ know, so as to make the most of it, and to
      separate the essential from the accidental.”

      “First of all, I wish to impress upon you that the boy certainly
      left of his own free-will. He got down from his window and he
      went off, either alone or with someone. That is sure.”

      I assented.

      “Well, now, let us turn to this unfortunate German master. The
      boy was fully dressed when he fled. Therefore, he foresaw what he
      would do. But the German went without his socks. He certainly
      acted on very short notice.”

      “Undoubtedly.”

      “Why did he go? Because, from his bedroom window, he saw the
      flight of the boy, because he wished to overtake him and bring
      him back. He seized his bicycle, pursued the lad, and in pursuing
      him met his death.”

      “So it would seem.”

      “Now I come to the critical part of my argument. The natural
      action of a man in pursuing a little boy would be to run after
      him. He would know that he could overtake him. But the German
      does not do so. He turns to his bicycle. I am told that he was an
      excellent cyclist. He would not do this, if he did not see that
      the boy had some swift means of escape.”

      “The other bicycle.”

      “Let us continue our reconstruction. He meets his death five
      miles from the school—not by a bullet, mark you, which even a lad
      might conceivably discharge, but by a savage blow dealt by a
      vigorous arm. The lad, then, _had_ a companion in his flight. And
      the flight was a swift one, since it took five miles before an
      expert cyclist could overtake them. Yet we survey the ground
      round the scene of the tragedy. What do we find? A few
      cattle-tracks, nothing more. I took a wide sweep round, and there
      is no path within fifty yards. Another cyclist could have had
      nothing to do with the actual murder, nor were there any human
      foot-marks.”

      “Holmes,” I cried, “this is impossible.”

      “Admirable!” he said. “A most illuminating remark. It _is_
      impossible as I state it, and therefore I must in some respect
      have stated it wrong. Yet you saw for yourself. Can you suggest
      any fallacy?”

      “He could not have fractured his skull in a fall?”

      “In a morass, Watson?”

      “I am at my wits’ end.”

      “Tut, tut, we have solved some worse problems. At least we have
      plenty of material, if we can only use it. Come, then, and,
      having exhausted the Palmer, let us see what the Dunlop with the
      patched cover has to offer us.”

      We picked up the track and followed it onward for some distance,
      but soon the moor rose into a long, heather-tufted curve, and we
      left the watercourse behind us. No further help from tracks could
      be hoped for. At the spot where we saw the last of the Dunlop
      tire it might equally have led to Holdernesse Hall, the stately
      towers of which rose some miles to our left, or to a low, grey
      village which lay in front of us and marked the position of the
      Chesterfield high road.

      As we approached the forbidding and squalid inn, with the sign of
      a game-cock above the door, Holmes gave a sudden groan, and
      clutched me by the shoulder to save himself from falling. He had
      had one of those violent strains of the ankle which leave a man
      helpless. With difficulty he limped up to the door, where a
      squat, dark, elderly man was smoking a black clay pipe.

      “How are you, Mr. Reuben Hayes?” said Holmes.

      “Who are you, and how do you get my name so pat?” the countryman
      answered, with a suspicious flash of a pair of cunning eyes.

      “Well, it’s printed on the board above your head. It’s easy to
      see a man who is master of his own house. I suppose you haven’t
      such a thing as a carriage in your stables?”

      “No, I have not.”

      “I can hardly put my foot to the ground.”

      “Don’t put it to the ground.”

      “But I can’t walk.”

      “Well, then hop.”

      Mr. Reuben Hayes’s manner was far from gracious, but Holmes took
      it with admirable good-humour.

      “Look here, my man,” said he. “This is really rather an awkward
      fix for me. I don’t mind how I get on.”

      “Neither do I,” said the morose landlord.

      “The matter is very important. I would offer you a sovereign for
      the use of a bicycle.”

      The landlord pricked up his ears.

      “Where do you want to go?”

      “To Holdernesse Hall.”

      “Pals of the Dook, I suppose?” said the landlord, surveying our
      mud-stained garments with ironical eyes.

      Holmes laughed good-naturedly.

      “He’ll be glad to see us, anyhow.”

      “Why?”

      “Because we bring him news of his lost son.”

      The landlord gave a very visible start.

      “What, you’re on his track?”

      “He has been heard of in Liverpool. They expect to get him every
      hour.”

      Again a swift change passed over the heavy, unshaven face. His
      manner was suddenly genial.

      “I’ve less reason to wish the Dook well than most men,” said he,
      “for I was head coachman once, and cruel bad he treated me. It
      was him that sacked me without a character on the word of a lying
      corn-chandler. But I’m glad to hear that the young lord was heard
      of in Liverpool, and I’ll help you to take the news to the Hall.”

      “Thank you,” said Holmes. “We’ll have some food first. Then you
      can bring round the bicycle.”

      “I haven’t got a bicycle.”

      Holmes held up a sovereign.

      “I tell you, man, that I haven’t got one. I’ll let you have two
      horses as far as the Hall.”

      “Well, well,” said Holmes, “we’ll talk about it when we’ve had
      something to eat.”

      When we were left alone in the stone-flagged kitchen, it was
      astonishing how rapidly that sprained ankle recovered. It was
      nearly nightfall, and we had eaten nothing since early morning,
      so that we spent some time over our meal. Holmes was lost in
      thought, and once or twice he walked over to the window and
      stared earnestly out. It opened on to a squalid courtyard. In the
      far corner was a smithy, where a grimy lad was at work. On the
      other side were the stables. Holmes had sat down again after one
      of these excursions, when he suddenly sprang out of his chair
      with a loud exclamation.

      “By heaven, Watson, I believe that I’ve got it!” he cried. “Yes,
      yes, it must be so. Watson, do you remember seeing any cow-tracks
      to-day?”

      “Yes, several.”

      “Where?”

      “Well, everywhere. They were at the morass, and again on the
      path, and again near where poor Heidegger met his death.”

      “Exactly. Well, now, Watson, how many cows did you see on the
      moor?”

      “I don’t remember seeing any.”

      “Strange, Watson, that we should see tracks all along our line,
      but never a cow on the whole moor. Very strange, Watson, eh?”

      “Yes, it is strange.”

      “Now, Watson, make an effort, throw your mind back. Can you see
      those tracks upon the path?”

      “Yes, I can.”

      “Can you recall that the tracks were sometimes like that,
      Watson,”—he arranged a number of breadcrumbs in this fashion—: :
      : : :—“and sometimes like this”—: . : . : . : .—“and occasionally
      like this”—.・.・.・. “Can you remember that?”

      “No, I cannot.”

      “But I can. I could swear to it. However, we will go back at our
      leisure and verify it. What a blind beetle I have been, not to
      draw my conclusion.”

      “And what is your conclusion?”

      “Only that it is a remarkable cow which walks, canters, and
      gallops. By George! Watson, it was no brain of a country publican
      that thought out such a blind as that. The coast seems to be
      clear, save for that lad in the smithy. Let us slip out and see
      what we can see.”

      There were two rough-haired, unkempt horses in the tumble-down
      stable. Holmes raised the hind leg of one of them and laughed
      aloud.

      “Old shoes, but newly shod—old shoes, but new nails. This case
      deserves to be a classic. Let us go across to the smithy.”

      The lad continued his work without regarding us. I saw Holmes’s
      eye darting to right and left among the litter of iron and wood
      which was scattered about the floor. Suddenly, however, we heard
      a step behind us, and there was the landlord, his heavy eyebrows
      drawn over his savage eyes, his swarthy features convulsed with
      passion. He held a short, metal-headed stick in his hand, and he
      advanced in so menacing a fashion that I was right glad to feel
      the revolver in my pocket.

      “You infernal spies!” the man cried. “What are you doing there?”

      “Why, Mr. Reuben Hayes,” said Holmes, coolly, “one might think
      that you were afraid of our finding something out.”

      The man mastered himself with a violent effort, and his grim
      mouth loosened into a false laugh, which was more menacing than
      his frown.

      “You’re welcome to all you can find out in my smithy,” said he.
      “But look here, mister, I don’t care for folk poking about my
      place without my leave, so the sooner you pay your score and get
      out of this the better I shall be pleased.”

      “All right, Mr. Hayes, no harm meant,” said Holmes. “We have been
      having a look at your horses, but I think I’ll walk, after all.
      It’s not far, I believe.”

      “Not more than two miles to the Hall gates. That’s the road to
      the left.” He watched us with sullen eyes until we had left his
      premises.

      We did not go very far along the road, for Holmes stopped the
      instant that the curve hid us from the landlord’s view.

      “We were warm, as the children say, at that inn,” said he. “I
      seem to grow colder every step that I take away from it. No, no,
      I can’t possibly leave it.”

      “I am convinced,” said I, “that this Reuben Hayes knows all about
      it. A more self-evident villain I never saw.”

      “Oh! he impressed you in that way, did he? There are the horses,
      there is the smithy. Yes, it is an interesting place, this
      Fighting Cock. I think we shall have another look at it in an
      unobtrusive way.”

      A long, sloping hillside, dotted with grey limestone boulders,
      stretched behind us. We had turned off the road, and were making
      our way up the hill, when, looking in the direction of
      Holdernesse Hall, I saw a cyclist coming swiftly along.

      “Get down, Watson!” cried Holmes, with a heavy hand upon my
      shoulder. We had hardly sunk from view when the man flew past us
      on the road. Amid a rolling cloud of dust, I caught a glimpse of
      a pale, agitated face—a face with horror in every lineament, the
      mouth open, the eyes staring wildly in front. It was like some
      strange caricature of the dapper James Wilder whom we had seen
      the night before.

      “The Duke’s secretary!” cried Holmes. “Come, Watson, let us see
      what he does.”

      We scrambled from rock to rock, until in a few moments we had
      made our way to a point from which we could see the front door of
      the inn. Wilder’s bicycle was leaning against the wall beside it.
      No one was moving about the house, nor could we catch a glimpse
      of any faces at the windows. Slowly the twilight crept down as
      the sun sank behind the high towers of Holdernesse Hall. Then, in
      the gloom, we saw the two side-lamps of a trap light up in the
      stable-yard of the inn, and shortly afterwards heard the rattle
      of hoofs, as it wheeled out into the road and tore off at a
      furious pace in the direction of Chesterfield.

      “What do you make of that, Watson?” Holmes whispered.

      “It looks like a flight.”

      “A single man in a dog-cart, so far as I could see. Well, it
      certainly was not Mr. James Wilder, for there he is at the door.”

      A red square of light had sprung out of the darkness. In the
      middle of it was the black figure of the secretary, his head
      advanced, peering out into the night. It was evident that he was
      expecting someone. Then at last there were steps in the road, a
      second figure was visible for an instant against the light, the
      door shut, and all was black once more. Five minutes later a lamp
      was lit in a room upon the first floor.

      “It seems to be a curious class of custom that is done by the
      Fighting Cock,” said Holmes.

      “The bar is on the other side.”

      “Quite so. These are what one may call the private guests. Now,
      what in the world is Mr. James Wilder doing in that den at this
      hour of night, and who is the companion who comes to meet him
      there? Come, Watson, we must really take a risk and try to
      investigate this a little more closely.”

      Together we stole down to the road and crept across to the door
      of the inn. The bicycle still leaned against the wall. Holmes
      struck a match and held it to the back wheel, and I heard him
      chuckle as the light fell upon a patched Dunlop tire. Up above us
      was the lighted window.

      “I must have a peep through that, Watson. If you bend your back
      and support yourself upon the wall, I think that I can manage.”

      An instant later, his feet were on my shoulders, but he was
      hardly up before he was down again.

      “Come, my friend,” said he, “our day’s work has been quite long
      enough. I think that we have gathered all that we can. It’s a
      long walk to the school, and the sooner we get started the
      better.”

      He hardly opened his lips during that weary trudge across the
      moor, nor would he enter the school when he reached it, but went
      on to Mackleton Station, whence he could send some telegrams.
      Late at night I heard him consoling Dr. Huxtable, prostrated by
      the tragedy of his master’s death, and later still he entered my
      room as alert and vigorous as he had been when he started in the
      morning. “All goes well, my friend,” said he. “I promise that
      before to-morrow evening we shall have reached the solution of
      the mystery.”

      At eleven o’clock next morning my friend and I were walking up
      the famous yew avenue of Holdernesse Hall. We were ushered
      through the magnificent Elizabethan doorway and into his Grace’s
      study. There we found Mr. James Wilder, demure and courtly, but
      with some trace of that wild terror of the night before still
      lurking in his furtive eyes and in his twitching features.

      “You have come to see his Grace? I am sorry, but the fact is that
      the Duke is far from well. He has been very much upset by the
      tragic news. We received a telegram from Dr. Huxtable yesterday
      afternoon, which told us of your discovery.”

      “I must see the Duke, Mr. Wilder.”

      “But he is in his room.”

      “Then I must go to his room.”

      “I believe he is in his bed.”

      “I will see him there.”

      Holmes’s cold and inexorable manner showed the secretary that it
      was useless to argue with him.

      “Very good, Mr. Holmes, I will tell him that you are here.”

      After an hour’s delay, the great nobleman appeared. His face was
      more cadaverous than ever, his shoulders had rounded, and he
      seemed to me to be an altogether older man than he had been the
      morning before. He greeted us with a stately courtesy and seated
      himself at his desk, his red beard streaming down on the table.

      “Well, Mr. Holmes?” said he.

      But my friend’s eyes were fixed upon the secretary, who stood by
      his master’s chair.

      “I think, your Grace, that I could speak more freely in Mr.
      Wilder’s absence.”

      The man turned a shade paler and cast a malignant glance at
      Holmes.

      “If your Grace wishes——”

      “Yes, yes, you had better go. Now, Mr. Holmes, what have you to
      say?”

      My friend waited until the door had closed behind the retreating
      secretary.

      “The fact is, your Grace,” said he, “that my colleague, Dr.
      Watson, and myself had an assurance from Dr. Huxtable that a
      reward had been offered in this case. I should like to have this
      confirmed from your own lips.”

      “Certainly, Mr. Holmes.”

      “It amounted, if I am correctly informed, to five thousand pounds
      to anyone who will tell you where your son is?”

      “Exactly.”

      “And another thousand to the man who will name the person or
      persons who keep him in custody?”

      “Exactly.”

      “Under the latter heading is included, no doubt, not only those
      who may have taken him away, but also those who conspire to keep
      him in his present position?”

      “Yes, yes,” cried the Duke, impatiently. “If you do your work
      well, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, you will have no reason to complain of
      niggardly treatment.”

      My friend rubbed his thin hands together with an appearance of
      avidity which was a surprise to me, who knew his frugal tastes.

      “I fancy that I see your Grace’s check-book upon the table,” said
      he. “I should be glad if you would make me out a check for six
      thousand pounds. It would be as well, perhaps, for you to cross
      it. The Capital and Counties Bank, Oxford Street branch are my
      agents.”

      His Grace sat very stern and upright in his chair and looked
      stonily at my friend.

      “Is this a joke, Mr. Holmes? It is hardly a subject for
      pleasantry.”

      “Not at all, your Grace. I was never more earnest in my life.”

      “What do you mean, then?”

      “I mean that I have earned the reward. I know where your son is,
      and I know some, at least, of those who are holding him.”

      The Duke’s beard had turned more aggressively red than ever
      against his ghastly white face.

      “Where is he?” he gasped.

      “He is, or was last night, at the Fighting Cock Inn, about two
      miles from your park gate.”

      The Duke fell back in his chair.

      “And whom do you accuse?”

      Sherlock Holmes’s answer was an astounding one. He stepped
      swiftly forward and touched the Duke upon the shoulder.

      “I accuse _you_,” said he. “And now, your Grace, I’ll trouble you
      for that check.”

      Never shall I forget the Duke’s appearance as he sprang up and
      clawed with his hands, like one who is sinking into an abyss.
      Then, with an extraordinary effort of aristocratic self-command,
      he sat down and sank his face in his hands. It was some minutes
      before he spoke.

      “How much do you know?” he asked at last, without raising his
      head.

      “I saw you together last night.”

      “Does anyone else beside your friend know?”

      “I have spoken to no one.”

      The Duke took a pen in his quivering fingers and opened his
      check-book.

      “I shall be as good as my word, Mr. Holmes. I am about to write
      your check, however unwelcome the information which you have
      gained may be to me. When the offer was first made, I little
      thought the turn which events might take. But you and your friend
      are men of discretion, Mr. Holmes?”

      “I hardly understand your Grace.”

      “I must put it plainly, Mr. Holmes. If only you two know of this
      incident, there is no reason why it should go any farther. I
      think twelve thousand pounds is the sum that I owe you, is it
      not?”

      But Holmes smiled and shook his head.

      “I fear, your Grace, that matters can hardly be arranged so
      easily. There is the death of this schoolmaster to be accounted
      for.”

      “But James knew nothing of that. You cannot hold him responsible
      for that. It was the work of this brutal ruffian whom he had the
      misfortune to employ.”

      “I must take the view, your Grace, that when a man embarks upon a
      crime, he is morally guilty of any other crime which may spring
      from it.”

      “Morally, Mr. Holmes. No doubt you are right. But surely not in
      the eyes of the law. A man cannot be condemned for a murder at
      which he was not present, and which he loathes and abhors as much
      as you do. The instant that he heard of it he made a complete
      confession to me, so filled was he with horror and remorse. He
      lost not an hour in breaking entirely with the murderer. Oh, Mr.
      Holmes, you must save him—you must save him! I tell you that you
      must save him!” The Duke had dropped the last attempt at
      self-command, and was pacing the room with a convulsed face and
      with his clenched hands raving in the air. At last he mastered
      himself and sat down once more at his desk. “I appreciate your
      conduct in coming here before you spoke to anyone else,” said he.
      “At least, we may take counsel how far we can minimize this
      hideous scandal.”

      “Exactly,” said Holmes. “I think, your Grace, that this can only
      be done by absolute frankness between us. I am disposed to help
      your Grace to the best of my ability, but, in order to do so, I
      must understand to the last detail how the matter stands. I
      realize that your words applied to Mr. James Wilder, and that he
      is not the murderer.”

      “No, the murderer has escaped.”

      Sherlock Holmes smiled demurely.

      “Your Grace can hardly have heard of any small reputation which I
      possess, or you would not imagine that it is so easy to escape
      me. Mr. Reuben Hayes was arrested at Chesterfield, on my
      information, at eleven o’clock last night. I had a telegram from
      the head of the local police before I left the school this
      morning.”

      The Duke leaned back in his chair and stared with amazement at my
      friend.

      “You seem to have powers that are hardly human,” said he. “So
      Reuben Hayes is taken? I am right glad to hear it, if it will not
      react upon the fate of James.”

      “Your secretary?”

      “No, sir, my son.”

      It was Holmes’s turn to look astonished.

      “I confess that this is entirely new to me, your Grace. I must
      beg you to be more explicit.”

      “I will conceal nothing from you. I agree with you that complete
      frankness, however painful it may be to me, is the best policy in
      this desperate situation to which James’s folly and jealousy have
      reduced us. When I was a very young man, Mr. Holmes, I loved with
      such a love as comes only once in a lifetime. I offered the lady
      marriage, but she refused it on the grounds that such a match
      might mar my career. Had she lived, I would certainly never have
      married anyone else. She died, and left this one child, whom for
      her sake I have cherished and cared for. I could not acknowledge
      the paternity to the world, but I gave him the best of
      educations, and since he came to manhood I have kept him near my
      person. He surmised my secret, and has presumed ever since upon
      the claim which he has upon me, and upon his power of provoking a
      scandal which would be abhorrent to me. His presence had
      something to do with the unhappy issue of my marriage. Above all,
      he hated my young legitimate heir from the first with a
      persistent hatred. You may well ask me why, under these
      circumstances, I still kept James under my roof. I answer that it
      was because I could see his mother’s face in his, and that for
      her dear sake there was no end to my long-suffering. All her
      pretty ways too—there was not one of them which he could not
      suggest and bring back to my memory. I _could_ not send him away.
      But I feared so much lest he should do Arthur—that is, Lord
      Saltire—a mischief, that I dispatched him for safety to Dr.
      Huxtable’s school.

      “James came into contact with this fellow Hayes, because the man
      was a tenant of mine, and James acted as agent. The fellow was a
      rascal from the beginning, but, in some extraordinary way, James
      became intimate with him. He had always a taste for low company.
      When James determined to kidnap Lord Saltire, it was of this
      man’s service that he availed himself. You remember that I wrote
      to Arthur upon that last day. Well, James opened the letter and
      inserted a note asking Arthur to meet him in a little wood called
      the Ragged Shaw, which is near to the school. He used the
      Duchess’s name, and in that way got the boy to come. That evening
      James bicycled over—I am telling you what he has himself
      confessed to me—and he told Arthur, whom he met in the wood, that
      his mother longed to see him, that she was awaiting him on the
      moor, and that if he would come back into the wood at midnight he
      would find a man with a horse, who would take him to her. Poor
      Arthur fell into the trap. He came to the appointment, and found
      this fellow Hayes with a led pony. Arthur mounted, and they set
      off together. It appears—though this James only heard
      yesterday—that they were pursued, that Hayes struck the pursuer
      with his stick, and that the man died of his injuries. Hayes
      brought Arthur to his public-house, the Fighting Cock, where he
      was confined in an upper room, under the care of Mrs. Hayes, who
      is a kindly woman, but entirely under the control of her brutal
      husband.

      “Well, Mr. Holmes, that was the state of affairs when I first saw
      you two days ago. I had no more idea of the truth than you. You
      will ask me what was James’s motive in doing such a deed. I
      answer that there was a great deal which was unreasoning and
      fanatical in the hatred which he bore my heir. In his view he
      should himself have been heir of all my estates, and he deeply
      resented those social laws which made it impossible. At the same
      time, he had a definite motive also. He was eager that I should
      break the entail, and he was of opinion that it lay in my power
      to do so. He intended to make a bargain with me—to restore Arthur
      if I would break the entail, and so make it possible for the
      estate to be left to him by will. He knew well that I should
      never willingly invoke the aid of the police against him. I say
      that he would have proposed such a bargain to me, but he did not
      actually do so, for events moved too quickly for him, and he had
      not time to put his plans into practice.

      “What brought all his wicked scheme to wreck was your discovery
      of this man Heidegger’s dead body. James was seized with horror
      at the news. It came to us yesterday, as we sat together in this
      study. Dr. Huxtable had sent a telegram. James was so overwhelmed
      with grief and agitation that my suspicions, which had never been
      entirely absent, rose instantly to a certainty, and I taxed him
      with the deed. He made a complete voluntary confession. Then he
      implored me to keep his secret for three days longer, so as to
      give his wretched accomplice a chance of saving his guilty life.
      I yielded—as I have always yielded—to his prayers, and instantly
      James hurried off to the Fighting Cock to warn Hayes and give him
      the means of flight. I could not go there by daylight without
      provoking comment, but as soon as night fell I hurried off to see
      my dear Arthur. I found him safe and well, but horrified beyond
      expression by the dreadful deed he had witnessed. In deference to
      my promise, and much against my will, I consented to leave him
      there for three days, under the charge of Mrs. Hayes, since it
      was evident that it was impossible to inform the police where he
      was without telling them also who was the murderer, and I could
      not see how that murderer could be punished without ruin to my
      unfortunate James. You asked for frankness, Mr. Holmes, and I
      have taken you at your word, for I have now told you everything
      without an attempt at circumlocution or concealment. Do you in
      turn be as frank with me.”

      “I will,” said Holmes. “In the first place, your Grace, I am
      bound to tell you that you have placed yourself in a most serious
      position in the eyes of the law. You have condoned a felony, and
      you have aided the escape of a murderer, for I cannot doubt that
      any money which was taken by James Wilder to aid his accomplice
      in his flight came from your Grace’s purse.”

      The Duke bowed his assent.

      “This is, indeed, a most serious matter. Even more culpable in my
      opinion, your Grace, is your attitude towards your younger son.
      You leave him in this den for three days.”

      “Under solemn promises——”

      “What are promises to such people as these? You have no guarantee
      that he will not be spirited away again. To humour your guilty
      elder son, you have exposed your innocent younger son to imminent
      and unnecessary danger. It was a most unjustifiable action.”

      The proud lord of Holdernesse was not accustomed to be so rated
      in his own ducal hall. The blood flushed into his high forehead,
      but his conscience held him dumb.

      “I will help you, but on one condition only. It is that you ring
      for the footman and let me give such orders as I like.”

      Without a word, the Duke pressed the electric bell. A servant
      entered.

      “You will be glad to hear,” said Holmes, “that your young master
      is found. It is the Duke’s desire that the carriage shall go at
      once to the Fighting Cock Inn to bring Lord Saltire home.

      “Now,” said Holmes, when the rejoicing lackey had disappeared,
      “having secured the future, we can afford to be more lenient with
      the past. I am not in an official position, and there is no
      reason, so long as the ends of justice are served, why I should
      disclose all that I know. As to Hayes, I say nothing. The gallows
      awaits him, and I would do nothing to save him from it. What he
      will divulge I cannot tell, but I have no doubt that your Grace
      could make him understand that it is to his interest to be
      silent. From the police point of view he will have kidnapped the
      boy for the purpose of ransom. If they do not themselves find it
      out, I see no reason why I should prompt them to take a broader
      point of view. I would warn your Grace, however, that the
      continued presence of Mr. James Wilder in your household can only
      lead to misfortune.”

      “I understand that, Mr. Holmes, and it is already settled that he
      shall leave me forever, and go to seek his fortune in Australia.”

      “In that case, your Grace, since you have yourself stated that
      any unhappiness in your married life was caused by his presence, I
      would suggest that you make such amends as you can to the
      Duchess, and that you try to resume those relations which have
      been so unhappily interrupted.”

      “That also I have arranged, Mr. Holmes. I wrote to the Duchess
      this morning.”

      “In that case,” said Holmes, rising, “I think that my friend and
      I can congratulate ourselves upon several most happy results from
      our little visit to the North. There is one other small point
      upon which I desire some light. This fellow Hayes had shod his
      horses with shoes which counterfeited the tracks of cows. Was it
      from Mr. Wilder that he learned so extraordinary a device?”

      The Duke stood in thought for a moment, with a look of intense
      surprise on his face. Then he opened a door and showed us into a
      large room furnished as a museum. He led the way to a glass case
      in a corner, and pointed to the inscription.

      “These shoes,” it ran, “were dug up in the moat of Holdernesse
      Hall. They are for the use of horses, but they are shaped below
      with a cloven foot of iron, so as to throw pursuers off the
      track. They are supposed to have belonged to some of the
      marauding Barons of Holdernesse in the Middle Ages.”

      Holmes opened the case, and moistening his finger he passed it
      along the shoe. A thin film of recent mud was left upon his skin.

      “Thank you,” said he, as he replaced the glass. “It is the second
      most interesting object that I have seen in the North.”

      “And the first?”

      Holmes folded up his check and placed it carefully in his
      notebook. “I am a poor man,” said he, as he patted it
      affectionately, and thrust it into the depths of his inner
      pocket.




THE ADVENTURE OF BLACK PETER


      I have never known my friend to be in better form, both mental
      and physical, than in the year ’95. His increasing fame had
      brought with it an immense practice, and I should be guilty of an
      indiscretion if I were even to hint at the identity of some of
      the illustrious clients who crossed our humble threshold in Baker
      Street. Holmes, however, like all great artists, lived for his
      art’s sake, and, save in the case of the Duke of Holdernesse, I
      have seldom known him claim any large reward for his inestimable
      services. So unworldly was he—or so capricious—that he frequently
      refused his help to the powerful and wealthy where the problem
      made no appeal to his sympathies, while he would devote weeks of
      most intense application to the affairs of some humble client
      whose case presented those strange and dramatic qualities which
      appealed to his imagination and challenged his ingenuity.

      In this memorable year ’95, a curious and incongruous succession
      of cases had engaged his attention, ranging from his famous
      investigation of the sudden death of Cardinal Tosca—an inquiry
      which was carried out by him at the express desire of His
      Holiness the Pope—down to his arrest of Wilson, the notorious
      canary-trainer, which removed a plague-spot from the East End of
      London. Close on the heels of these two famous cases came the
      tragedy of Woodman’s Lee, and the very obscure circumstances
      which surrounded the death of Captain Peter Carey. No record of
      the doings of Mr. Sherlock Holmes would be complete which did not
      include some account of this very unusual affair.

      During the first week of July, my friend had been absent so often
      and so long from our lodgings that I knew he had something on
      hand. The fact that several rough-looking men called during that
      time and inquired for Captain Basil made me understand that
      Holmes was working somewhere under one of the numerous disguises
      and names with which he concealed his own formidable identity. He
      had at least five small refuges in different parts of London, in
      which he was able to change his personality. He said nothing of
      his business to me, and it was not my habit to force a
      confidence. The first positive sign which he gave me of the
      direction which his investigation was taking was an extraordinary
      one. He had gone out before breakfast, and I had sat down to mine
      when he strode into the room, his hat upon his head and a huge
      barbed-headed spear tucked like an umbrella under his arm.

      “Good gracious, Holmes!” I cried. “You don’t mean to say that you
      have been walking about London with that thing?”

      “I drove to the butcher’s and back.”

      “The butcher’s?”

      “And I return with an excellent appetite. There can be no
      question, my dear Watson, of the value of exercise before
      breakfast. But I am prepared to bet that you will not guess the
      form that my exercise has taken.”

      “I will not attempt it.”

      He chuckled as he poured out the coffee.

      “If you could have looked into Allardyce’s back shop, you would
      have seen a dead pig swung from a hook in the ceiling, and a
      gentleman in his shirt sleeves furiously stabbing at it with this
      weapon. I was that energetic person, and I have satisfied myself
      that by no exertion of my strength can I transfix the pig with a
      single blow. Perhaps you would care to try?”

      “Not for worlds. But why were you doing this?”

      “Because it seemed to me to have an indirect bearing upon the
      mystery of Woodman’s Lee. Ah, Hopkins, I got your wire last
      night, and I have been expecting you. Come and join us.”

      Our visitor was an exceedingly alert man, thirty years of age,
      dressed in a quiet tweed suit, but retaining the erect bearing of
      one who was accustomed to official uniform. I recognized him at
      once as Stanley Hopkins, a young police inspector, for whose
      future Holmes had high hopes, while he in turn professed the
      admiration and respect of a pupil for the scientific methods of
      the famous amateur. Hopkins’s brow was clouded, and he sat down
      with an air of deep dejection.

      “No, thank you, sir. I breakfasted before I came round. I spent
      the night in town, for I came up yesterday to report.”

      “And what had you to report?”

      “Failure, sir, absolute failure.”

      “You have made no progress?”

      “None.”

      “Dear me! I must have a look at the matter.”

      “I wish to heavens that you would, Mr. Holmes. It’s my first big
      chance, and I am at my wits’ end. For goodness’ sake, come down
      and lend me a hand.”

      “Well, well, it just happens that I have already read all the
      available evidence, including the report of the inquest, with
      some care. By the way, what do you make of that tobacco pouch,
      found on the scene of the crime? Is there no clue there?”

      Hopkins looked surprised.

      “It was the man’s own pouch, sir. His initials were inside it.
      And it was of sealskin,—and he was an old sealer.”

      “But he had no pipe.”

      “No, sir, we could find no pipe. Indeed, he smoked very little,
      and yet he might have kept some tobacco for his friends.”

      “No doubt. I only mention it because, if I had been handling the
      case, I should have been inclined to make that the starting-point
      of my investigation. However, my friend, Dr. Watson, knows
      nothing of this matter, and I should be none the worse for
      hearing the sequence of events once more. Just give us some short
      sketches of the essentials.”

      Stanley Hopkins drew a slip of paper from his pocket.

      “I have a few dates here which will give you the career of the
      dead man, Captain Peter Carey. He was born in ’45—fifty years of
      age. He was a most daring and successful seal and whale fisher.
      In 1883 he commanded the steam sealer _Sea Unicorn_, of Dundee.
      He had then had several successful voyages in succession, and in
      the following year, 1884, he retired. After that he travelled for
      some years, and finally he bought a small place called Woodman’s
      Lee, near Forest Row, in Sussex. There he has lived for six
      years, and there he died just a week ago to-day.

      “There were some most singular points about the man. In ordinary
      life, he was a strict Puritan—a silent, gloomy fellow. His
      household consisted of his wife, his daughter, aged twenty, and
      two female servants. These last were continually changing, for it
      was never a very cheery situation, and sometimes it became past
      all bearing. The man was an intermittent drunkard, and when he
      had the fit on him he was a perfect fiend. He has been known to
      drive his wife and daughter out of doors in the middle of the
      night and flog them through the park until the whole village
      outside the gates was aroused by their screams.

      “He was summoned once for a savage assault upon the old vicar,
      who had called upon him to remonstrate with him upon his conduct.
      In short, Mr. Holmes, you would go far before you found a more
      dangerous man than Peter Carey, and I have heard that he bore the
      same character when he commanded his ship. He was known in the
      trade as Black Peter, and the name was given him, not only on
      account of his swarthy features and the colour of his huge beard,
      but for the humours which were the terror of all around him. I
      need not say that he was loathed and avoided by every one of his
      neighbours, and that I have not heard one single word of sorrow
      about his terrible end.

      “You must have read in the account of the inquest about the man’s
      cabin, Mr. Holmes, but perhaps your friend here has not heard of
      it. He had built himself a wooden outhouse—he always called it
      the ‘cabin’—a few hundred yards from his house, and it was here
      that he slept every night. It was a little, single-roomed hut,
      sixteen feet by ten. He kept the key in his pocket, made his own
      bed, cleaned it himself, and allowed no other foot to cross the
      threshold. There are small windows on each side, which were
      covered by curtains and never opened. One of these windows was
      turned towards the high road, and when the light burned in it at
      night the folk used to point it out to each other and wonder what
      Black Peter was doing in there. That’s the window, Mr. Holmes,
      which gave us one of the few bits of positive evidence that came
      out at the inquest.

      “You remember that a stonemason, named Slater, walking from
      Forest Row about one o’clock in the morning—two days before the
      murder—stopped as he passed the grounds and looked at the square
      of light still shining among the trees. He swears that the shadow
      of a man’s head turned sideways was clearly visible on the blind,
      and that this shadow was certainly not that of Peter Carey, whom
      he knew well. It was that of a bearded man, but the beard was
      short and bristled forward in a way very different from that of
      the captain. So he says, but he had been two hours in the
      public-house, and it is some distance from the road to the
      window. Besides, this refers to the Monday, and the crime was
      done upon the Wednesday.

      “On the Tuesday, Peter Carey was in one of his blackest moods,
      flushed with drink and as savage as a dangerous wild beast. He
      roamed about the house, and the women ran for it when they heard
      him coming. Late in the evening, he went down to his own hut.
      About two o’clock the following morning, his daughter, who slept
      with her window open, heard a most fearful yell from that
      direction, but it was no unusual thing for him to bawl and shout
      when he was in drink, so no notice was taken. On rising at seven,
      one of the maids noticed that the door of the hut was open, but
      so great was the terror which the man caused that it was midday
      before anyone would venture down to see what had become of him.
      Peeping into the open door, they saw a sight which sent them
      flying, with white faces, into the village. Within an hour, I was
      on the spot and had taken over the case.

      “Well, I have fairly steady nerves, as you know, Mr. Holmes, but
      I give you my word, that I got a shake when I put my head into
      that little house. It was droning like a harmonium with the flies
      and bluebottles, and the floor and walls were like a
      slaughter-house. He had called it a cabin, and a cabin it was,
      sure enough, for you would have thought that you were in a ship.
      There was a bunk at one end, a sea-chest, maps and charts, a
      picture of the _Sea Unicorn_, a line of logbooks on a shelf, all
      exactly as one would expect to find it in a captain’s room. And
      there, in the middle of it, was the man himself—his face twisted
      like a lost soul in torment, and his great brindled beard stuck
      upward in his agony. Right through his broad breast a steel
      harpoon had been driven, and it had sunk deep into the wood of
      the wall behind him. He was pinned like a beetle on a card. Of
      course, he was quite dead, and had been so from the instant that
      he had uttered that last yell of agony.

      “I know your methods, sir, and I applied them. Before I permitted
      anything to be moved, I examined most carefully the ground
      outside, and also the floor of the room. There were no
      footmarks.”

      “Meaning that you saw none?”

      “I assure you, sir, that there were none.”

      “My good Hopkins, I have investigated many crimes, but I have
      never yet seen one which was committed by a flying creature. As
      long as the criminal remains upon two legs so long must there be
      some indentation, some abrasion, some trifling displacement which
      can be detected by the scientific searcher. It is incredible that
      this blood-bespattered room contained no trace which could have
      aided us. I understand, however, from the inquest that there were
      some objects which you failed to overlook?”

      The young inspector winced at my companion’s ironical comments.

      “I was a fool not to call you in at the time Mr. Holmes. However,
      that’s past praying for now. Yes, there were several objects in
      the room which called for special attention. One was the harpoon
      with which the deed was committed. It had been snatched down from
      a rack on the wall. Two others remained there, and there was a
      vacant place for the third. On the stock was engraved ‘SS. _Sea
      Unicorn_, Dundee.’ This seemed to establish that the crime had
      been done in a moment of fury, and that the murderer had seized
      the first weapon which came in his way. The fact that the crime
      was committed at two in the morning, and yet Peter Carey was
      fully dressed, suggested that he had an appointment with the
      murderer, which is borne out by the fact that a bottle of rum and
      two dirty glasses stood upon the table.”

      “Yes,” said Holmes; “I think that both inferences are
      permissible. Was there any other spirit but rum in the room?”

      “Yes, there was a tantalus containing brandy and whisky on the
      sea-chest. It is of no importance to us, however, since the
      decanters were full, and it had therefore not been used.”

      “For all that, its presence has some significance,” said Holmes.
      “However, let us hear some more about the objects which do seem
      to you to bear upon the case.”

      “There was this tobacco-pouch upon the table.”

      “What part of the table?”

      “It lay in the middle. It was of coarse sealskin—the
      straight-haired skin, with a leather thong to bind it. Inside was
      ‘P.C.’ on the flap. There was half an ounce of strong ship’s
      tobacco in it.”

      “Excellent! What more?”

      Stanley Hopkins drew from his pocket a drab-covered notebook. The
      outside was rough and worn, the leaves discoloured. On the first
      page were written the initials “J.H.N.” and the date “1883.”
      Holmes laid it on the table and examined it in his minute way,
      while Hopkins and I gazed over each shoulder. On the second page
      were the printed letters “C.P.R.,” and then came several sheets
      of numbers. Another heading was “Argentine,” another “Costa
      Rica,” and another “San Paulo,” each with pages of signs and
      figures after it.

      “What do you make of these?” asked Holmes.

      “They appear to be lists of Stock Exchange securities. I thought
      that ‘J.H.N.’ were the initials of a broker, and that ‘C.P.R.’
      may have been his client.”

      “Try Canadian Pacific Railway,” said Holmes.

      Stanley Hopkins swore between his teeth, and struck his thigh
      with his clenched hand.

      “What a fool I have been!” he cried. “Of course, it is as you
      say. Then ‘J.H.N.’ are the only initials we have to solve. I have
      already examined the old Stock Exchange lists, and I can find no
      one in 1883, either in the house or among the outside brokers,
      whose initials correspond with these. Yet I feel that the clue is
      the most important one that I hold. You will admit, Mr. Holmes,
      that there is a possibility that these initials are those of the
      second person who was present—in other words, of the murderer. I
      would also urge that the introduction into the case of a document
      relating to large masses of valuable securities gives us for the
      first time some indication of a motive for the crime.”

      Sherlock Holmes’s face showed that he was thoroughly taken aback
      by this new development.

      “I must admit both your points,” said he. “I confess that this
      notebook, which did not appear at the inquest, modifies any views
      which I may have formed. I had come to a theory of the crime in
      which I can find no place for this. Have you endeavoured to trace
      any of the securities here mentioned?”

      “Inquiries are now being made at the offices, but I fear that the
      complete register of the stockholders of these South American
      concerns is in South America, and that some weeks must elapse
      before we can trace the shares.”

      Holmes had been examining the cover of the notebook with his
      magnifying lens.

      “Surely there is some discolouration here,” said he.

      “Yes, sir, it is a blood-stain. I told you that I picked the book
      off the floor.”

      “Was the blood-stain above or below?”

      “On the side next the boards.”

      “Which proves, of course, that the book was dropped after the
      crime was committed.”

      “Exactly, Mr. Holmes. I appreciated that point, and I conjectured
      that it was dropped by the murderer in his hurried flight. It lay
      near the door.”

      “I suppose that none of these securities have been found among
      the property of the dead man?”

      “No, sir.”

      “Have you any reason to suspect robbery?”

      “No, sir. Nothing seemed to have been touched.”

      “Dear me, it is certainly a very interesting case. Then there was
      a knife, was there not?”

      “A sheath-knife, still in its sheath. It lay at the feet of the
      dead man. Mrs. Carey has identified it as being her husband’s
      property.”

      Holmes was lost in thought for some time.

      “Well,” said he, at last, “I suppose I shall have to come out and
      have a look at it.”

      Stanley Hopkins gave a cry of joy.

      “Thank you, sir. That will, indeed, be a weight off my mind.”

      Holmes shook his finger at the inspector.

      “It would have been an easier task a week ago,” said he. “But
      even now my visit may not be entirely fruitless. Watson, if you
      can spare the time, I should be very glad of your company. If you
      will call a four-wheeler, Hopkins, we shall be ready to start for
      Forest Row in a quarter of an hour.”

      Alighting at the small wayside station, we drove for some miles
      through the remains of widespread woods, which were once part of
      that great forest which for so long held the Saxon invaders at
      bay—the impenetrable “weald,” for sixty years the bulwark of
      Britain. Vast sections of it have been cleared, for this is the
      seat of the first iron-works of the country, and the trees have
      been felled to smelt the ore. Now the richer fields of the North
      have absorbed the trade, and nothing save these ravaged groves
      and great scars in the earth show the work of the past. Here, in
      a clearing upon the green slope of a hill, stood a long, low,
      stone house, approached by a curving drive running through the
      fields. Nearer the road, and surrounded on three sides by bushes,
      was a small outhouse, one window and the door facing in our
      direction. It was the scene of the murder.

      Stanley Hopkins led us first to the house, where he introduced us
      to a haggard, grey-haired woman, the widow of the murdered man,
      whose gaunt and deep-lined face, with the furtive look of terror
      in the depths of her red-rimmed eyes, told of the years of
      hardship and ill-usage which she had endured. With her was her
      daughter, a pale, fair-haired girl, whose eyes blazed defiantly
      at us as she told us that she was glad that her father was dead,
      and that she blessed the hand which had struck him down. It was a
      terrible household that Black Peter Carey had made for himself,
      and it was with a sense of relief that we found ourselves in the
      sunlight again and making our way along a path which had been
      worn across the fields by the feet of the dead man.

      The outhouse was the simplest of dwellings, wooden-walled,
      shingle-roofed, one window beside the door and one on the farther
      side. Stanley Hopkins drew the key from his pocket and had
      stooped to the lock, when he paused with a look of attention and
      surprise upon his face.

      “Someone has been tampering with it,” he said.

      There could be no doubt of the fact. The woodwork was cut, and
      the scratches showed white through the paint, as if they had been
      that instant done. Holmes had been examining the window.

      “Someone has tried to force this also. Whoever it was has failed
      to make his way in. He must have been a very poor burglar.”

      “This is a most extraordinary thing,” said the inspector, “I
      could swear that these marks were not here yesterday evening.”

      “Some curious person from the village, perhaps,” I suggested.

      “Very unlikely. Few of them would dare to set foot in the
      grounds, far less try to force their way into the cabin. What do
      you think of it, Mr. Holmes?”

      “I think that fortune is very kind to us.”

      “You mean that the person will come again?”

      “It is very probable. He came expecting to find the door open. He
      tried to get in with the blade of a very small penknife. He could
      not manage it. What would he do?”

      “Come again next night with a more useful tool.”

      “So I should say. It will be our fault if we are not there to
      receive him. Meanwhile, let me see the inside of the cabin.”

      The traces of the tragedy had been removed, but the furniture
      within the little room still stood as it had been on the night of
      the crime. For two hours, with most intense concentration, Holmes
      examined every object in turn, but his face showed that his quest
      was not a successful one. Once only he paused in his patient
      investigation.

      “Have you taken anything off this shelf, Hopkins?”

      “No, I have moved nothing.”

      “Something has been taken. There is less dust in this corner of
      the shelf than elsewhere. It may have been a book lying on its
      side. It may have been a box. Well, well, I can do nothing more.
      Let us walk in these beautiful woods, Watson, and give a few
      hours to the birds and the flowers. We shall meet you here later,
      Hopkins, and see if we can come to closer quarters with the
      gentleman who has paid this visit in the night.”

      It was past eleven o’clock when we formed our little ambuscade.
      Hopkins was for leaving the door of the hut open, but Holmes was
      of the opinion that this would rouse the suspicions of the
      stranger. The lock was a perfectly simple one, and only a strong
      blade was needed to push it back. Holmes also suggested that we
      should wait, not inside the hut, but outside it, among the bushes
      which grew round the farther window. In this way we should be
      able to watch our man if he struck a light, and see what his
      object was in this stealthy nocturnal visit.

      It was a long and melancholy vigil, and yet brought with it
      something of the thrill which the hunter feels when he lies
      beside the water-pool, and waits for the coming of the thirsty
      beast of prey. What savage creature was it which might steal upon
      us out of the darkness? Was it a fierce tiger of crime, which
      could only be taken fighting hard with flashing fang and claw, or
      would it prove to be some skulking jackal, dangerous only to the
      weak and unguarded?

      In absolute silence we crouched amongst the bushes, waiting for
      whatever might come. At first the steps of a few belated
      villagers, or the sound of voices from the village, lightened our
      vigil, but one by one these interruptions died away, and an
      absolute stillness fell upon us, save for the chimes of the
      distant church, which told us of the progress of the night, and
      for the rustle and whisper of a fine rain falling amid the
      foliage which roofed us in.

      Half-past two had chimed, and it was the darkest hour which
      precedes the dawn, when we all started as a low but sharp click
      came from the direction of the gate. Someone had entered the
      drive. Again there was a long silence, and I had begun to fear
      that it was a false alarm, when a stealthy step was heard upon
      the other side of the hut, and a moment later a metallic scraping
      and clinking. The man was trying to force the lock. This time his
      skill was greater or his tool was better, for there was a sudden
      snap and the creak of the hinges. Then a match was struck, and
      next instant the steady light from a candle filled the interior
      of the hut. Through the gauze curtain our eyes were all riveted
      upon the scene within.

      The nocturnal visitor was a young man, frail and thin, with a
      black moustache, which intensified the deadly pallor of his face.
      He could not have been much above twenty years of age. I have
      never seen any human being who appeared to be in such a pitiable
      fright, for his teeth were visibly chattering, and he was shaking
      in every limb. He was dressed like a gentleman, in Norfolk jacket
      and knickerbockers, with a cloth cap upon his head. We watched
      him staring round with frightened eyes. Then he laid the
      candle-end upon the table and disappeared from our view into one
      of the corners. He returned with a large book, one of the
      logbooks which formed a line upon the shelves. Leaning on the
      table, he rapidly turned over the leaves of this volume until he
      came to the entry which he sought. Then, with an angry gesture of
      his clenched hand, he closed the book, replaced it in the corner,
      and put out the light. He had hardly turned to leave the hut when
      Hopkin’s hand was on the fellow’s collar, and I heard his loud
      gasp of terror as he understood that he was taken. The candle was
      relit, and there was our wretched captive, shivering and cowering
      in the grasp of the detective. He sank down upon the sea-chest,
      and looked helplessly from one of us to the other.

      “Now, my fine fellow,” said Stanley Hopkins, “who are you, and
      what do you want here?”

      The man pulled himself together, and faced us with an effort at
      self-composure.

      “You are detectives, I suppose?” said he. “You imagine I am
      connected with the death of Captain Peter Carey. I assure you
      that I am innocent.”

      “We’ll see about that,” said Hopkins. “First of all, what is your
      name?”

      “It is John Hopley Neligan.”

      I saw Holmes and Hopkins exchange a quick glance.

      “What are you doing here?”

      “Can I speak confidentially?”

      “No, certainly not.”

      “Why should I tell you?”

      “If you have no answer, it may go badly with you at the trial.”

      The young man winced.

      “Well, I will tell you,” he said. “Why should I not? And yet I
      hate to think of this old scandal gaining a new lease of life.
      Did you ever hear of Dawson and Neligan?”

      I could see, from Hopkins’s face, that he never had, but Holmes
      was keenly interested.

      “You mean the West Country bankers,” said he. “They failed for a
      million, ruined half the county families of Cornwall, and Neligan
      disappeared.”

      “Exactly. Neligan was my father.”

      At last we were getting something positive, and yet it seemed a
      long gap between an absconding banker and Captain Peter Carey
      pinned against the wall with one of his own harpoons. We all
      listened intently to the young man’s words.

      “It was my father who was really concerned. Dawson had retired. I
      was only ten years of age at the time, but I was old enough to
      feel the shame and horror of it all. It has always been said that
      my father stole all the securities and fled. It is not true. It
      was his belief that if he were given time in which to realize
      them, all would be well and every creditor paid in full. He
      started in his little yacht for Norway just before the warrant
      was issued for his arrest. I can remember that last night when he
      bade farewell to my mother. He left us a list of the securities
      he was taking, and he swore that he would come back with his
      honour cleared, and that none who had trusted him would suffer.
      Well, no word was ever heard from him again. Both the yacht and
      he vanished utterly. We believed, my mother and I, that he and
      it, with the securities that he had taken with him, were at the
      bottom of the sea. We had a faithful friend, however, who is a
      business man, and it was he who discovered some time ago that
      some of the securities which my father had with him had
      reappeared on the London market. You can imagine our amazement. I
      spent months in trying to trace them, and at last, after many
      doubtings and difficulties, I discovered that the original seller
      had been Captain Peter Carey, the owner of this hut.

      “Naturally, I made some inquiries about the man. I found that he
      had been in command of a whaler which was due to return from the
      Arctic seas at the very time when my father was crossing to
      Norway. The autumn of that year was a stormy one, and there was a
      long succession of southerly gales. My father’s yacht may well
      have been blown to the north, and there met by Captain Peter
      Carey’s ship. If that were so, what had become of my father? In
      any case, if I could prove from Peter Carey’s evidence how these
      securities came on the market it would be a proof that my father
      had not sold them, and that he had no view to personal profit
      when he took them.

      “I came down to Sussex with the intention of seeing the captain,
      but it was at this moment that his terrible death occurred. I
      read at the inquest a description of his cabin, in which it
      stated that the old logbooks of his vessel were preserved in it.
      It struck me that if I could see what occurred in the month of
      August, 1883, on board the _Sea Unicorn_, I might settle the
      mystery of my father’s fate. I tried last night to get at these
      logbooks, but was unable to open the door. To-night I tried again
      and succeeded, but I find that the pages which deal with that
      month have been torn from the book. It was at that moment I found
      myself a prisoner in your hands.”

      “Is that all?” asked Hopkins.

      “Yes, that is all.” His eyes shifted as he said it.

      “You have nothing else to tell us?”

      He hesitated.

      “No, there is nothing.”

      “You have not been here before last night?”

      “No.”

      “Then how do you account for _that_?” cried Hopkins, as he held
      up the damning notebook, with the initials of our prisoner on the
      first leaf and the blood-stain on the cover.

      The wretched man collapsed. He sank his face in his hands, and
      trembled all over.

      “Where did you get it?” he groaned. “I did not know. I thought I
      had lost it at the hotel.”

      “That is enough,” said Hopkins, sternly. “Whatever else you have
      to say, you must say in court. You will walk down with me now to
      the police-station. Well, Mr. Holmes, I am very much obliged to
      you and to your friend for coming down to help me. As it turns
      out your presence was unnecessary, and I would have brought the
      case to this successful issue without you, but, none the less, I
      am grateful. Rooms have been reserved for you at the Brambletye
      Hotel, so we can all walk down to the village together.”

      “Well, Watson, what do you think of it?” asked Holmes, as we
      travelled back next morning.

      “I can see that you are not satisfied.”

      “Oh, yes, my dear Watson, I am perfectly satisfied. At the same
      time, Stanley Hopkins’s methods do not commend themselves to me.
      I am disappointed in Stanley Hopkins. I had hoped for better
      things from him. One should always look for a possible
      alternative, and provide against it. It is the first rule of
      criminal investigation.”

      “What, then, is the alternative?”

      “The line of investigation which I have myself been pursuing. It
      may give us nothing. I cannot tell. But at least I shall follow
      it to the end.”

      Several letters were waiting for Holmes at Baker Street. He
      snatched one of them up, opened it, and burst out into a
      triumphant chuckle of laughter.

      “Excellent, Watson! The alternative develops. Have you telegraph
      forms? Just write a couple of messages for me: ‘Sumner, Shipping
      Agent, Ratcliff Highway. Send three men on, to arrive ten
      to-morrow morning.—Basil.’ That’s my name in those parts. The
      other is: ‘Inspector Stanley Hopkins, 46 Lord Street, Brixton.
      Come breakfast to-morrow at nine-thirty. Important. Wire if
      unable to come.—Sherlock Holmes.’ There, Watson, this infernal
      case has haunted me for ten days. I hereby banish it completely
      from my presence. To-morrow, I trust that we shall hear the last
      of it forever.”

      Sharp at the hour named Inspector Stanley Hopkins appeared, and
      we sat down together to the excellent breakfast which Mrs. Hudson
      had prepared. The young detective was in high spirits at his
      success.

      “You really think that your solution must be correct?” asked
      Holmes.

      “I could not imagine a more complete case.”

      “It did not seem to me conclusive.”

      “You astonish me, Mr. Holmes. What more could one ask for?”

      “Does your explanation cover every point?”

      “Undoubtedly. I find that young Neligan arrived at the Brambletye
      Hotel on the very day of the crime. He came on the pretence of
      playing golf. His room was on the ground-floor, and he could get
      out when he liked. That very night he went down to Woodman’s Lee,
      saw Peter Carey at the hut, quarrelled with him, and killed him
      with the harpoon. Then, horrified by what he had done, he fled
      out of the hut, dropping the notebook which he had brought with
      him in order to question Peter Carey about these different
      securities. You may have observed that some of them were marked
      with ticks, and the others—the great majority—were not. Those
      which are ticked have been traced on the London market, but the
      others, presumably, were still in the possession of Carey, and
      young Neligan, according to his own account, was anxious to
      recover them in order to do the right thing by his father’s
      creditors. After his flight he did not dare to approach the hut
      again for some time, but at last he forced himself to do so in
      order to obtain the information which he needed. Surely that is
      all simple and obvious?”

      Holmes smiled and shook his head.

      “It seems to me to have only one drawback, Hopkins, and that is
      that it is intrinsically impossible. Have you tried to drive a
      harpoon through a body? No? Tut, tut my dear sir, you must really
      pay attention to these details. My friend Watson could tell you
      that I spent a whole morning in that exercise. It is no easy
      matter, and requires a strong and practised arm. But this blow
      was delivered with such violence that the head of the weapon sank
      deep into the wall. Do you imagine that this anæmic youth was
      capable of so frightful an assault? Is he the man who hobnobbed
      in rum and water with Black Peter in the dead of the night? Was
      it his profile that was seen on the blind two nights before? No,
      no, Hopkins, it is another and more formidable person for whom we
      must seek.”

      The detective’s face had grown longer and longer during Holmes’s
      speech. His hopes and his ambitions were all crumbling about him.
      But he would not abandon his position without a struggle.

      “You can’t deny that Neligan was present that night, Mr. Holmes.
      The book will prove that. I fancy that I have evidence enough to
      satisfy a jury, even if you are able to pick a hole in it.
      Besides, Mr. Holmes, I have laid my hand upon _my_ man. As to
      this terrible person of yours, where is he?”

      “I rather fancy that he is on the stair,” said Holmes, serenely.
      “I think, Watson, that you would do well to put that revolver
      where you can reach it.” He rose and laid a written paper upon a
      side-table. “Now we are ready,” said he.

      There had been some talking in gruff voices outside, and now Mrs.
      Hudson opened the door to say that there were three men inquiring
      for Captain Basil.

      “Show them in one by one,” said Holmes.

      “The first who entered was a little Ribston pippin of a man, with
      ruddy cheeks and fluffy white side-whiskers. Holmes had drawn a
      letter from his pocket.

      “What name?” he asked.

      “James Lancaster.”

      “I am sorry, Lancaster, but the berth is full. Here is half a
      sovereign for your trouble. Just step into this room and wait
      there for a few minutes.”

      The second man was a long, dried-up creature, with lank hair and
      sallow cheeks. His name was Hugh Pattins. He also received his
      dismissal, his half-sovereign, and the order to wait.

      The third applicant was a man of remarkable appearance. A fierce
      bull-dog face was framed in a tangle of hair and beard, and two
      bold, dark eyes gleamed behind the cover of thick, tufted,
      overhung eyebrows. He saluted and stood sailor-fashion, turning
      his cap round in his hands.

      “Your name?” asked Holmes.

      “Patrick Cairns.”

      “Harpooner?”

      “Yes, sir. Twenty-six voyages.”

      “Dundee, I suppose?”

      “Yes, sir.”

      “And ready to start with an exploring ship?”

      “Yes, sir.”

      “What wages?”

      “Eight pounds a month.”

      “Could you start at once?”

      “As soon as I get my kit.”

      “Have you your papers?”

      “Yes, sir.” He took a sheaf of worn and greasy forms from his
      pocket. Holmes glanced over them and returned them.

      “You are just the man I want,” said he. “Here’s the agreement on
      the side-table. If you sign it the whole matter will be settled.”

      The seaman lurched across the room and took up the pen.

      “Shall I sign here?” he asked, stooping over the table.

      Holmes leaned over his shoulder and passed both hands over his
      neck.

      “This will do,” said he.

      I heard a click of steel and a bellow like an enraged bull. The
      next instant Holmes and the seaman were rolling on the ground
      together. He was a man of such gigantic strength that, even with
      the handcuffs which Holmes had so deftly fastened upon his
      wrists, he would have very quickly overpowered my friend had
      Hopkins and I not rushed to his rescue. Only when I pressed the
      cold muzzle of the revolver to his temple did he at last
      understand that resistance was vain. We lashed his ankles with
      cord, and rose breathless from the struggle.

      “I must really apologize, Hopkins,” said Sherlock Holmes. “I fear
      that the scrambled eggs are cold. However, you will enjoy the
      rest of your breakfast all the better, will you not, for the
      thought that you have brought your case to a triumphant
      conclusion.”

      Stanley Hopkins was speechless with amazement.

      “I don’t know what to say, Mr. Holmes,” he blurted out at last,
      with a very red face. “It seems to me that I have been making a
      fool of myself from the beginning. I understand now, what I
      should never have forgotten, that I am the pupil and you are the
      master. Even now I see what you have done, but I don’t know how
      you did it or what it signifies.”

      “Well, well,” said Holmes, good-humouredly. “We all learn by
      experience, and your lesson this time is that you should never
      lose sight of the alternative. You were so absorbed in young
      Neligan that you could not spare a thought to Patrick Cairns, the
      true murderer of Peter Carey.”

      The hoarse voice of the seaman broke in on our conversation.

      “See here, mister,” said he, “I make no complaint of being
      man-handled in this fashion, but I would have you call things by
      their right names. You say I murdered Peter Carey, I say I
      _killed_ Peter Carey, and there’s all the difference. Maybe you
      don’t believe what I say. Maybe you think I am just slinging you
      a yarn.”

      “Not at all,” said Holmes. “Let us hear what you have to say.”

      “It’s soon told, and, by the Lord, every word of it is truth. I
      knew Black Peter, and when he pulled out his knife I whipped a
      harpoon through him sharp, for I knew that it was him or me.
      That’s how he died. You can call it murder. Anyhow, I’d as soon
      die with a rope round my neck as with Black Peter’s knife in my
      heart.”

      “How came you there?” asked Holmes.

      “I’ll tell it you from the beginning. Just sit me up a little, so
      as I can speak easy. It was in ’83 that it happened—August of
      that year. Peter Carey was master of the _Sea Unicorn_, and I was
      spare harpooner. We were coming out of the ice-pack on our way
      home, with head winds and a week’s southerly gale, when we picked
      up a little craft that had been blown north. There was one man on
      her—a landsman. The crew had thought she would founder and had
      made for the Norwegian coast in the dinghy. I guess they were all
      drowned. Well, we took him on board, this man, and he and the
      skipper had some long talks in the cabin. All the baggage we took
      off with him was one tin box. So far as I know, the man’s name
      was never mentioned, and on the second night he disappeared as if
      he had never been. It was given out that he had either thrown
      himself overboard or fallen overboard in the heavy weather that
      we were having. Only one man knew what had happened to him, and
      that was me, for, with my own eyes, I saw the skipper tip up his
      heels and put him over the rail in the middle watch of a dark
      night, two days before we sighted the Shetland Lights. Well, I
      kept my knowledge to myself, and waited to see what would come of
      it. When we got back to Scotland it was easily hushed up, and
      nobody asked any questions. A stranger died by accident and it
      was nobody’s business to inquire. Shortly after Peter Carey gave
      up the sea, and it was long years before I could find where he
      was. I guessed that he had done the deed for the sake of what was
      in that tin box, and that he could afford now to pay me well for
      keeping my mouth shut. I found out where he was through a sailor
      man that had met him in London, and down I went to squeeze him.
      The first night he was reasonable enough, and was ready to give
      me what would make me free of the sea for life. We were to fix it
      all two nights later. When I came, I found him three parts drunk
      and in a vile temper. We sat down and we drank and we yarned
      about old times, but the more he drank the less I liked the look
      on his face. I spotted that harpoon upon the wall, and I thought
      I might need it before I was through. Then at last he broke out
      at me, spitting and cursing, with murder in his eyes and a great
      clasp-knife in his hand. He had not time to get it from the
      sheath before I had the harpoon through him. Heavens! what a yell
      he gave! and his face gets between me and my sleep. I stood
      there, with his blood splashing round me, and I waited for a bit,
      but all was quiet, so I took heart once more. I looked round, and
      there was the tin box on the shelf. I had as much right to it as
      Peter Carey, anyhow, so I took it with me and left the hut. Like
      a fool I left my baccy-pouch upon the table.

      “Now I’ll tell you the queerest part of the whole story. I had
      hardly got outside the hut when I heard someone coming, and I hid
      among the bushes. A man came slinking along, went into the hut,
      gave a cry as if he had seen a ghost, and legged it as hard as he
      could run until he was out of sight. Who he was or what he wanted
      is more than I can tell. For my part I walked ten miles, got a
      train at Tunbridge Wells, and so reached London, and no one the
      wiser.

      “Well, when I came to examine the box I found there was no money
      in it, and nothing but papers that I would not dare to sell. I
      had lost my hold on Black Peter and was stranded in London
      without a shilling. There was only my trade left. I saw these
      advertisements about harpooners, and high wages, so I went to the
      shipping agents, and they sent me here. That’s all I know, and I
      say again that if I killed Black Peter, the law should give me
      thanks, for I saved them the price of a hempen rope.”

      “A very clear statement said Holmes,” rising and lighting his
      pipe. “I think, Hopkins, that you should lose no time in
      conveying your prisoner to a place of safety. This room is not
      well adapted for a cell, and Mr. Patrick Cairns occupies too
      large a proportion of our carpet.”

      “Mr. Holmes,” said Hopkins, “I do not know how to express my
      gratitude. Even now I do not understand how you attained this
      result.”

      “Simply by having the good fortune to get the right clue from the
      beginning. It is very possible if I had known about this notebook
      it might have led away my thoughts, as it did yours. But all I
      heard pointed in the one direction. The amazing strength, the
      skill in the use of the harpoon, the rum and water, the sealskin
      tobacco-pouch with the coarse tobacco—all these pointed to a
      seaman, and one who had been a whaler. I was convinced that the
      initials ‘P.C.’ upon the pouch were a coincidence, and not those
      of Peter Carey, since he seldom smoked, and no pipe was found in
      his cabin. You remember that I asked whether whisky and brandy
      were in the cabin. You said they were. How many landsmen are
      there who would drink rum when they could get these other
      spirits? Yes, I was certain it was a seaman.”

      “And how did you find him?”

      “My dear sir, the problem had become a very simple one. If it
      were a seaman, it could only be a seaman who had been with him on
      the _Sea Unicorn_. So far as I could learn he had sailed in no
      other ship. I spent three days in wiring to Dundee, and at the
      end of that time I had ascertained the names of the crew of the
      _Sea Unicorn_ in 1883. When I found Patrick Cairns among the
      harpooners, my research was nearing its end. I argued that the
      man was probably in London, and that he would desire to leave the
      country for a time. I therefore spent some days in the East End,
      devised an Arctic expedition, put forth tempting terms for
      harpooners who would serve under Captain Basil—and behold the
      result!”

      “Wonderful!” cried Hopkins. “Wonderful!”

      “You must obtain the release of young Neligan as soon as
      possible,” said Holmes. “I confess that I think you owe him some
      apology. The tin box must be returned to him, but, of course, the
      securities which Peter Carey has sold are lost forever. There’s
      the cab, Hopkins, and you can remove your man. If you want me for
      the trial, my address and that of Watson will be somewhere in
      Norway—I’ll send particulars later.”




THE ADVENTURE OF CHARLES AUGUSTUS MILVERTON


      It is years since the incidents of which I speak took place, and
      yet it is with diffidence that I allude to them. For a long time,
      even with the utmost discretion and reticence, it would have been
      impossible to make the facts public, but now the principal person
      concerned is beyond the reach of human law, and with due
      suppression the story may be told in such fashion as to injure no
      one. It records an absolutely unique experience in the career
      both of Mr. Sherlock Holmes and of myself. The reader will excuse
      me if I conceal the date or any other fact by which he might
      trace the actual occurrence.

      We had been out for one of our evening rambles, Holmes and I, and
      had returned about six o’clock on a cold, frosty winter’s
      evening. As Holmes turned up the lamp the light fell upon a card
      on the table. He glanced at it, and then, with an ejaculation of
      disgust, threw it on the floor. I picked it up and read:

      CHARLES AUGUSTUS MILVERTON,
      Appledore Towers,
      Hampstead.
      _Agent_.

      “Who is he?” I asked.

      “The worst man in London,” Holmes answered, as he sat down and
      stretched his legs before the fire. “Is anything on the back of
      the card?”

      I turned it over.

      “Will call at 6:30—C.A.M.,” I read.

      “Hum! He’s about due. Do you feel a creeping, shrinking
      sensation, Watson, when you stand before the serpents in the Zoo,
      and see the slithery, gliding, venomous creatures, with their
      deadly eyes and wicked, flattened faces? Well, that’s how
      Milverton impresses me. I’ve had to do with fifty murderers in my
      career, but the worst of them never gave me the repulsion which I
      have for this fellow. And yet I can’t get out of doing business
      with him—indeed, he is here at my invitation.”

      “But who is he?”

      “I’ll tell you, Watson. He is the king of all the blackmailers.
      Heaven help the man, and still more the woman, whose secret and
      reputation come into the power of Milverton! With a smiling face
      and a heart of marble, he will squeeze and squeeze until he has
      drained them dry. The fellow is a genius in his way, and would
      have made his mark in some more savoury trade. His method is as
      follows: He allows it to be known that he is prepared to pay very
      high sums for letters which compromise people of wealth and
      position. He receives these wares not only from treacherous
      valets or maids, but frequently from genteel ruffians, who have
      gained the confidence and affection of trusting women. He deals
      with no niggard hand. I happen to know that he paid seven hundred
      pounds to a footman for a note two lines in length, and that the
      ruin of a noble family was the result. Everything which is in the
      market goes to Milverton, and there are hundreds in this great
      city who turn white at his name. No one knows where his grip may
      fall, for he is far too rich and far too cunning to work from
      hand to mouth. He will hold a card back for years in order to
      play it at the moment when the stake is best worth winning. I
      have said that he is the worst man in London, and I would ask you
      how could one compare the ruffian, who in hot blood bludgeons his
      mate, with this man, who methodically and at his leisure tortures
      the soul and wrings the nerves in order to add to his already
      swollen money-bags?”

      I had seldom heard my friend speak with such intensity of
      feeling.

      “But surely,” said I, “the fellow must be within the grasp of the
      law?”

      “Technically, no doubt, but practically not. What would it profit
      a woman, for example, to get him a few months’ imprisonment if
      her own ruin must immediately follow? His victims dare not hit
      back. If ever he blackmailed an innocent person, then indeed we
      should have him, but he is as cunning as the Evil One. No, no, we
      must find other ways to fight him.”

      “And why is he here?”

      “Because an illustrious client has placed her piteous case in my
      hands. It is the Lady Eva Blackwell, the most beautiful
      _débutante_ of last season. She is to be married in a fortnight
      to the Earl of Dovercourt. This fiend has several imprudent
      letters—imprudent, Watson, nothing worse—which were written to an
      impecunious young squire in the country. They would suffice to
      break off the match. Milverton will send the letters to the Earl
      unless a large sum of money is paid him. I have been commissioned
      to meet him, and—to make the best terms I can.”

      At that instant there was a clatter and a rattle in the street
      below. Looking down I saw a stately carriage and pair, the
      brilliant lamps gleaming on the glossy haunches of the noble
      chestnuts. A footman opened the door, and a small, stout man in a
      shaggy astrakhan overcoat descended. A minute later he was in the
      room.

      Charles Augustus Milverton was a man of fifty, with a large,
      intellectual head, a round, plump, hairless face, a perpetual
      frozen smile, and two keen grey eyes, which gleamed brightly from
      behind broad, gold-rimmed glasses. There was something of Mr.
      Pickwick’s benevolence in his appearance, marred only by the
      insincerity of the fixed smile and by the hard glitter of those
      restless and penetrating eyes. His voice was as smooth and suave
      as his countenance, as he advanced with a plump little hand
      extended, murmuring his regret for having missed us at his first
      visit. Holmes disregarded the outstretched hand and looked at him
      with a face of granite. Milverton’s smile broadened, he shrugged
      his shoulders removed his overcoat, folded it with great
      deliberation over the back of a chair, and then took a seat.

      “This gentleman?” said he, with a wave in my direction. “Is it
      discreet? Is it right?”

      “Dr. Watson is my friend and partner.”

      “Very good, Mr. Holmes. It is only in your client’s interests
      that I protested. The matter is so very delicate——”

      “Dr. Watson has already heard of it.”

      “Then we can proceed to business. You say that you are acting for
      Lady Eva. Has she empowered you to accept my terms?”

      “What are your terms?”

      “Seven thousand pounds.”

      “And the alternative?”

      “My dear sir, it is painful for me to discuss it, but if the
      money is not paid on the 14th, there certainly will be no
      marriage on the 18th.” His insufferable smile was more complacent
      than ever.

      Holmes thought for a little.

      “You appear to me,” he said, at last, “to be taking matters too
      much for granted. I am, of course, familiar with the contents of
      these letters. My client will certainly do what I may advise. I
      shall counsel her to tell her future husband the whole story and
      to trust to his generosity.”

      Milverton chuckled.

      “You evidently do not know the Earl,” said he.

      From the baffled look upon Holmes’s face, I could see clearly
      that he did.

      “What harm is there in the letters?” he asked.

      “They are sprightly—very sprightly,” Milverton answered. “The
      lady was a charming correspondent. But I can assure you that the
      Earl of Dovercourt would fail to appreciate them. However, since
      you think otherwise, we will let it rest at that. It is purely a
      matter of business. If you think that it is in the best interests
      of your client that these letters should be placed in the hands
      of the Earl, then you would indeed be foolish to pay so large a
      sum of money to regain them.” He rose and seized his astrakhan
      coat.

      Holmes was grey with anger and mortification.

      “Wait a little,” he said. “You go too fast. We should certainly
      make every effort to avoid scandal in so delicate a matter.”

      Milverton relapsed into his chair.

      “I was sure that you would see it in that light,” he purred.

      “At the same time,” Holmes continued, “Lady Eva is not a wealthy
      woman. I assure you that two thousand pounds would be a drain
      upon her resources, and that the sum you name is utterly beyond
      her power. I beg, therefore, that you will moderate your demands,
      and that you will return the letters at the price I indicate,
      which is, I assure you, the highest that you can get.”

      Milverton’s smile broadened and his eyes twinkled humorously.

      “I am aware that what you say is true about the lady’s
      resources,” said he. “At the same time you must admit that the
      occasion of a lady’s marriage is a very suitable time for her
      friends and relatives to make some little effort upon her behalf.
      They may hesitate as to an acceptable wedding present. Let me
      assure them that this little bundle of letters would give more
      joy than all the candelabra and butter-dishes in London.”

      “It is impossible,” said Holmes.

      “Dear me, dear me, how unfortunate!” cried Milverton, taking out
      a bulky pocketbook. “I cannot help thinking that ladies are
      ill-advised in not making an effort. Look at this!” He held up a
      little note with a coat-of-arms upon the envelope. “That belongs
      to—well, perhaps it is hardly fair to tell the name until
      to-morrow morning. But at that time it will be in the hands of
      the lady’s husband. And all because she will not find a beggarly
      sum which she could get by turning her diamonds into paste. It
      _is_ such a pity! Now, you remember the sudden end of the
      engagement between the Honourable Miss Miles and Colonel Dorking?
      Only two days before the wedding, there was a paragraph in the
      _Morning Post_ to say that it was all off. And why? It is almost
      incredible, but the absurd sum of twelve hundred pounds would
      have settled the whole question. Is it not pitiful? And here I
      find you, a man of sense, boggling about terms, when your
      client’s future and honour are at stake. You surprise me, Mr.
      Holmes.”

      “What I say is true,” Holmes answered. “The money cannot be
      found. Surely it is better for you to take the substantial sum
      which I offer than to ruin this woman’s career, which can profit
      you in no way?”

      “There you make a mistake, Mr. Holmes. An exposure would profit
      me indirectly to a considerable extent. I have eight or ten
      similar cases maturing. If it was circulated among them that I
      had made a severe example of the Lady Eva, I should find all of
      them much more open to reason. You see my point?”

      Holmes sprang from his chair.

      “Get behind him, Watson! Don’t let him out! Now, sir, let us see
      the contents of that notebook.”

      Milverton had glided as quick as a rat to the side of the room
      and stood with his back against the wall.

      “Mr. Holmes, Mr. Holmes,” he said, turning the front of his coat
      and exhibiting the butt of a large revolver, which projected from
      the inside pocket. “I have been expecting you to do something
      original. This has been done so often, and what good has ever
      come from it? I assure you that I am armed to the teeth, and I am
      perfectly prepared to use my weapons, knowing that the law will
      support me. Besides, your supposition that I would bring the
      letters here in a notebook is entirely mistaken. I would do
      nothing so foolish. And now, gentlemen, I have one or two little
      interviews this evening, and it is a long drive to Hampstead.” He
      stepped forward, took up his coat, laid his hand on his revolver,
      and turned to the door. I picked up a chair, but Holmes shook his
      head, and I laid it down again. With a bow, a smile, and a
      twinkle, Milverton was out of the room, and a few moments after
      we heard the slam of the carriage door and the rattle of the
      wheels as he drove away.

      Holmes sat motionless by the fire, his hands buried deep in his
      trouser pockets, his chin sunk upon his breast, his eyes fixed
      upon the glowing embers. For half an hour he was silent and
      still. Then, with the gesture of a man who has taken his
      decision, he sprang to his feet and passed into his bedroom. A
      little later a rakish young workman, with a goatee beard and a
      swagger, lit his clay pipe at the lamp before descending into the
      street. “I’ll be back some time, Watson,” said he, and vanished
      into the night. I understood that he had opened his campaign
      against Charles Augustus Milverton, but I little dreamed the
      strange shape which that campaign was destined to take.

      For some days Holmes came and went at all hours in this attire,
      but beyond a remark that his time was spent at Hampstead, and
      that it was not wasted, I knew nothing of what he was doing. At
      last, however, on a wild, tempestuous evening, when the wind
      screamed and rattled against the windows, he returned from his
      last expedition, and having removed his disguise he sat before
      the fire and laughed heartily in his silent inward fashion.

      “You would not call me a marrying man, Watson?”

      “No, indeed!”

      “You’ll be interested to hear that I’m engaged.”

      “My dear fellow! I congrat——”

      “To Milverton’s housemaid.”

      “Good heavens, Holmes!”

      “I wanted information, Watson.”

      “Surely you have gone too far?”

      “It was a most necessary step. I am a plumber with a rising
      business, Escott, by name. I have walked out with her each
      evening, and I have talked with her. Good heavens, those talks!
      However, I have got all I wanted. I know Milverton’s house as I
      know the palm of my hand.”

      “But the girl, Holmes?”

      He shrugged his shoulders.

      “You can’t help it, my dear Watson. You must play your cards as
      best you can when such a stake is on the table. However, I
      rejoice to say that I have a hated rival, who will certainly cut
      me out the instant that my back is turned. What a splendid night
      it is!”

      “You like this weather?”

      “It suits my purpose. Watson, I mean to burgle Milverton’s house
      to-night.”

      I had a catching of the breath, and my skin went cold at the
      words, which were slowly uttered in a tone of concentrated
      resolution. As a flash of lightning in the night shows up in an
      instant every detail of a wild landscape, so at one glance I
      seemed to see every possible result of such an action—the
      detection, the capture, the honoured career ending in irreparable
      failure and disgrace, my friend himself lying at the mercy of the
      odious Milverton.

      “For heaven’s sake, Holmes, think what you are doing,” I cried.

      “My dear fellow, I have given it every consideration. I am never
      precipitate in my actions, nor would I adopt so energetic and,
      indeed, so dangerous a course, if any other were possible. Let us
      look at the matter clearly and fairly. I suppose that you will
      admit that the action is morally justifiable, though technically
      criminal. To burgle his house is no more than to forcibly take
      his pocketbook—an action in which you were prepared to aid me.”

      I turned it over in my mind.

      “Yes,” I said, “it is morally justifiable so long as our object
      is to take no articles save those which are used for an illegal
      purpose.”

      “Exactly. Since it is morally justifiable, I have only to
      consider the question of personal risk. Surely a gentleman should
      not lay much stress upon this, when a lady is in most desperate
      need of his help?”

      “You will be in such a false position.”

      “Well, that is part of the risk. There is no other possible way
      of regaining these letters. The unfortunate lady has not the
      money, and there are none of her people in whom she could
      confide. To-morrow is the last day of grace, and unless we can
      get the letters to-night, this villain will be as good as his
      word and will bring about her ruin. I must, therefore, abandon my
      client to her fate or I must play this last card. Between
      ourselves, Watson, it’s a sporting duel between this fellow
      Milverton and me. He had, as you saw, the best of the first
      exchanges, but my self-respect and my reputation are concerned to
      fight it to a finish.”

      “Well, I don’t like it, but I suppose it must be,” said I. “When
      do we start?”

      “You are not coming.”

      “Then you are not going,” said I. “I give you my word of
      honour—and I never broke it in my life—that I will take a cab
      straight to the police-station and give you away, unless you let
      me share this adventure with you.”

      “You can’t help me.”

      “How do you know that? You can’t tell what may happen. Anyway, my
      resolution is taken. Other people besides you have self-respect,
      and even reputations.”

      Holmes had looked annoyed, but his brow cleared, and he clapped
      me on the shoulder.

      “Well, well, my dear fellow, be it so. We have shared this same
      room for some years, and it would be amusing if we ended by
      sharing the same cell. You know, Watson, I don’t mind confessing
      to you that I have always had an idea that I would have made a
      highly efficient criminal. This is the chance of my lifetime in
      that direction. See here!” He took a neat little leather case out
      of a drawer, and opening it he exhibited a number of shining
      instruments. “This is a first-class, up-to-date burgling kit,
      with nickel-plated jemmy, diamond-tipped glass-cutter, adaptable
      keys, and every modern improvement which the march of
      civilization demands. Here, too, is my dark lantern. Everything
      is in order. Have you a pair of silent shoes?”

      “I have rubber-soled tennis shoes.”

      “Excellent! And a mask?”

      “I can make a couple out of black silk.”

      “I can see that you have a strong, natural turn for this sort of
      thing. Very good, do you make the masks. We shall have some cold
      supper before we start. It is now nine-thirty. At eleven we shall
      drive as far as Church Row. It is a quarter of an hour’s walk
      from there to Appledore Towers. We shall be at work before
      midnight. Milverton is a heavy sleeper, and retires punctually at
      ten-thirty. With any luck we should be back here by two, with the
      Lady Eva’s letters in my pocket.”

      Holmes and I put on our dress-clothes, so that we might appear to
      be two theatre-goers homeward bound. In Oxford Street we picked
      up a hansom and drove to an address in Hampstead. Here we paid
      off our cab, and with our great coats buttoned up, for it was
      bitterly cold, and the wind seemed to blow through us, we walked
      along the edge of the heath.

      “It’s a business that needs delicate treatment,” said Holmes.
      “These documents are contained in a safe in the fellow’s study,
      and the study is the ante-room of his bed-chamber. On the other
      hand, like all these stout, little men who do themselves well, he
      is a plethoric sleeper. Agatha—that’s my _fiancée_—says it is a
      joke in the servants’ hall that it’s impossible to wake the
      master. He has a secretary who is devoted to his interests, and
      never budges from the study all day. That’s why we are going at
      night. Then he has a beast of a dog which roams the garden. I met
      Agatha late the last two evenings, and she locks the brute up so
      as to give me a clear run. This is the house, this big one in its
      own grounds. Through the gate—now to the right among the laurels.
      We might put on our masks here, I think. You see, there is not a
      glimmer of light in any of the windows, and everything is working
      splendidly.”

      With our black silk face-coverings, which turned us into two of
      the most truculent figures in London, we stole up to the silent,
      gloomy house. A sort of tiled veranda extended along one side of
      it, lined by several windows and two doors.

      “That’s his bedroom,” Holmes whispered. “This door opens straight
      into the study. It would suit us best, but it is bolted as well
      as locked, and we should make too much noise getting in. Come
      round here. There’s a greenhouse which opens into the
      drawing-room.”

      The place was locked, but Holmes removed a circle of glass and
      turned the key from the inside. An instant afterwards he had
      closed the door behind us, and we had become felons in the eyes
      of the law. The thick, warm air of the conservatory and the rich,
      choking fragrance of exotic plants took us by the throat. He
      seized my hand in the darkness and led me swiftly past banks of
      shrubs which brushed against our faces. Holmes had remarkable
      powers, carefully cultivated, of seeing in the dark. Still
      holding my hand in one of his, he opened a door, and I was
      vaguely conscious that we had entered a large room in which a
      cigar had been smoked not long before. He felt his way among the
      furniture, opened another door, and closed it behind us. Putting
      out my hand I felt several coats hanging from the wall, and I
      understood that I was in a passage. We passed along it and Holmes
      very gently opened a door upon the right-hand side. Something
      rushed out at us and my heart sprang into my mouth, but I could
      have laughed when I realized that it was the cat. A fire was
      burning in this new room, and again the air was heavy with
      tobacco smoke. Holmes entered on tiptoe, waited for me to follow,
      and then very gently closed the door. We were in Milverton’s
      study, and a _portière_ at the farther side showed the entrance
      to his bedroom.

      It was a good fire, and the room was illuminated by it. Near the
      door I saw the gleam of an electric switch, but it was
      unnecessary, even if it had been safe, to turn it on. At one side
      of the fireplace was a heavy curtain which covered the bay window
      we had seen from outside. On the other side was the door which
      communicated with the veranda. A desk stood in the centre, with a
      turning-chair of shining red leather. Opposite was a large
      bookcase, with a marble bust of Athene on the top. In the corner,
      between the bookcase and the wall, there stood a tall, green
      safe, the firelight flashing back from the polished brass knobs
      upon its face. Holmes stole across and looked at it. Then he
      crept to the door of the bedroom, and stood with slanting head
      listening intently. No sound came from within. Meanwhile it had
      struck me that it would be wise to secure our retreat through the
      outer door, so I examined it. To my amazement, it was neither
      locked nor bolted. I touched Holmes on the arm, and he turned his
      masked face in that direction. I saw him start, and he was
      evidently as surprised as I.

      “I don’t like it,” he whispered, putting his lips to my very ear.
      “I can’t quite make it out. Anyhow, we have no time to lose.”

      “Can I do anything?”

      “Yes, stand by the door. If you hear anyone come, bolt it on the
      inside, and we can get away as we came. If they come the other
      way, we can get through the door if our job is done, or hide
      behind these window curtains if it is not. Do you understand?”

      I nodded, and stood by the door. My first feeling of fear had
      passed away, and I thrilled now with a keener zest than I had
      ever enjoyed when we were the defenders of the law instead of its
      defiers. The high object of our mission, the consciousness that
      it was unselfish and chivalrous, the villainous character of our
      opponent, all added to the sporting interest of the adventure.
      Far from feeling guilty, I rejoiced and exulted in our dangers.
      With a glow of admiration I watched Holmes unrolling his case of
      instruments and choosing his tool with the calm, scientific
      accuracy of a surgeon who performs a delicate operation. I knew
      that the opening of safes was a particular hobby with him, and I
      understood the joy which it gave him to be confronted with this
      green and gold monster, the dragon which held in its maw the
      reputations of many fair ladies. Turning up the cuffs of his
      dress-coat—he had placed his overcoat on a chair—Holmes laid out
      two drills, a jemmy, and several skeleton keys. I stood at the
      centre door with my eyes glancing at each of the others, ready
      for any emergency, though, indeed, my plans were somewhat vague
      as to what I should do if we were interrupted. For half an hour,
      Holmes worked with concentrated energy, laying down one tool,
      picking up another, handling each with the strength and delicacy
      of the trained mechanic. Finally I heard a click, the broad green
      door swung open, and inside I had a glimpse of a number of paper
      packets, each tied, sealed, and inscribed. Holmes picked one out,
      but it was as hard to read by the flickering fire, and he drew
      out his little dark lantern, for it was too dangerous, with
      Milverton in the next room, to switch on the electric light.
      Suddenly I saw him halt, listen intently, and then in an instant
      he had swung the door of the safe to, picked up his coat, stuffed
      his tools into the pockets, and darted behind the window curtain,
      motioning me to do the same.

      It was only when I had joined him there that I heard what had
      alarmed his quicker senses. There was a noise somewhere within
      the house. A door slammed in the distance. Then a confused, dull
      murmur broke itself into the measured thud of heavy footsteps
      rapidly approaching. They were in the passage outside the room.
      They paused at the door. The door opened. There was a sharp snick
      as the electric light was turned on. The door closed once more,
      and the pungent reek of a strong cigar was borne to our nostrils.
      Then the footsteps continued backward and forward, backward and
      forward, within a few yards of us. Finally there was a creak from
      a chair, and the footsteps ceased. Then a key clicked in a lock,
      and I heard the rustle of papers.

      So far I had not dared to look out, but now I gently parted the
      division of the curtains in front of me and peeped through. From
      the pressure of Holmes’s shoulder against mine, I knew that he
      was sharing my observations. Right in front of us, and almost
      within our reach, was the broad, rounded back of Milverton. It
      was evident that we had entirely miscalculated his movements,
      that he had never been to his bedroom, but that he had been
      sitting up in some smoking or billiard room in the farther wing
      of the house, the windows of which we had not seen. His broad,
      grizzled head, with its shining patch of baldness, was in the
      immediate foreground of our vision. He was leaning far back in
      the red leather chair, his legs outstretched, a long, black cigar
      projecting at an angle from his mouth. He wore a semi-military
      smoking jacket, claret-coloured, with a black velvet collar. In
      his hand he held a long, legal document which he was reading in
      an indolent fashion, blowing rings of tobacco smoke from his lips
      as he did so. There was no promise of a speedy departure in his
      composed bearing and his comfortable attitude.

      I felt Holmes’s hand steal into mine and give me a reassuring
      shake, as if to say that the situation was within his powers, and
      that he was easy in his mind. I was not sure whether he had seen
      what was only too obvious from my position, that the door of the
      safe was imperfectly closed, and that Milverton might at any
      moment observe it. In my own mind I had determined that if I were
      sure, from the rigidity of his gaze, that it had caught his eye,
      I would at once spring out, throw my great coat over his head,
      pinion him, and leave the rest to Holmes. But Milverton never
      looked up. He was languidly interested by the papers in his hand,
      and page after page was turned as he followed the argument of the
      lawyer. At least, I thought, when he has finished the document
      and the cigar he will go to his room, but before he had reached
      the end of either, there came a remarkable development, which
      turned our thoughts into quite another channel.

      Several times I had observed that Milverton looked at his watch,
      and once he had risen and sat down again, with a gesture of
      impatience. The idea, however, that he might have an appointment
      at so strange an hour never occurred to me until a faint sound
      reached my ears from the veranda outside. Milverton dropped his
      papers and sat rigid in his chair. The sound was repeated, and
      then there came a gentle tap at the door. Milverton rose and
      opened it.

      “Well,” said he, curtly, “you are nearly half an hour late.”

      So this was the explanation of the unlocked door and of the
      nocturnal vigil of Milverton. There was the gentle rustle of a
      woman’s dress. I had closed the slit between the curtains as
      Milverton’s face had turned in our direction, but now I ventured
      very carefully to open it once more. He had resumed his seat, the
      cigar still projecting at an insolent angle from the corner of
      his mouth. In front of him, in the full glare of the electric
      light, there stood a tall, slim, dark woman, a veil over her
      face, a mantle drawn round her chin. Her breath came quick and
      fast, and every inch of the lithe figure was quivering with
      strong emotion.

      “Well,” said Milverton, “you made me lose a good night’s rest, my
      dear. I hope you’ll prove worth it. You couldn’t come any other
      time—eh?”

      The woman shook her head.

      “Well, if you couldn’t you couldn’t. If the Countess is a hard
      mistress, you have your chance to get level with her now. Bless
      the girl, what are you shivering about? That’s right. Pull
      yourself together. Now, let us get down to business.” He took a
      notebook from the drawer of his desk. “You say that you have five
      letters which compromise the Countess d’Albert. You want to sell
      them. I want to buy them. So far so good. It only remains to fix
      a price. I should want to inspect the letters, of course. If they
      are really good specimens—Great heavens, is it you?”

      The woman, without a word, had raised her veil and dropped the
      mantle from her chin. It was a dark, handsome, clear-cut face
      which confronted Milverton—a face with a curved nose, strong,
      dark eyebrows shading hard, glittering eyes, and a straight,
      thin-lipped mouth set in a dangerous smile.

      “It is I,” she said, “the woman whose life you have ruined.”

      Milverton laughed, but fear vibrated in his voice. “You were so
      very obstinate,” said he. “Why did you drive me to such
      extremities? I assure you I wouldn’t hurt a fly of my own accord,
      but every man has his business, and what was I to do? I put the
      price well within your means. You would not pay.”

      “So you sent the letters to my husband, and he—the noblest
      gentleman that ever lived, a man whose boots I was never worthy
      to lace—he broke his gallant heart and died. You remember that
      last night, when I came through that door, I begged and prayed
      you for mercy, and you laughed in my face as you are trying to
      laugh now, only your coward heart cannot keep your lips from
      twitching. Yes, you never thought to see me here again, but it
      was that night which taught me how I could meet you face to face,
      and alone. Well, Charles Milverton, what have you to say?”

      “Don’t imagine that you can bully me,” said he, rising to his
      feet. “I have only to raise my voice and I could call my servants
      and have you arrested. But I will make allowance for your natural
      anger. Leave the room at once as you came, and I will say no
      more.”

      The woman stood with her hand buried in her bosom, and the same
      deadly smile on her thin lips.

      “You will ruin no more lives as you have ruined mine. You will
      wring no more hearts as you wrung mine. I will free the world of
      a poisonous thing. Take that, you hound—and that!—and that!—and
      that!”

      She had drawn a little gleaming revolver, and emptied barrel
      after barrel into Milverton’s body, the muzzle within two feet of
      his shirt front. He shrank away and then fell forward upon the
      table, coughing furiously and clawing among the papers. Then he
      staggered to his feet, received another shot, and rolled upon the
      floor. “You’ve done me,” he cried, and lay still. The woman
      looked at him intently, and ground her heel into his upturned
      face. She looked again, but there was no sound or movement. I
      heard a sharp rustle, the night air blew into the heated room,
      and the avenger was gone.

      No interference upon our part could have saved the man from his
      fate, but, as the woman poured bullet after bullet into
      Milverton’s shrinking body I was about to spring out, when I felt
      Holmes’s cold, strong grasp upon my wrist. I understood the whole
      argument of that firm, restraining grip—that it was no affair of
      ours, that justice had overtaken a villain, that we had our own
      duties and our own objects, which were not to be lost sight of.
      But hardly had the woman rushed from the room when Holmes, with
      swift, silent steps, was over at the other door. He turned the
      key in the lock. At the same instant we heard voices in the house
      and the sound of hurrying feet. The revolver shots had roused the
      household. With perfect coolness Holmes slipped across to the
      safe, filled his two arms with bundles of letters, and poured
      them all into the fire. Again and again he did it, until the safe
      was empty. Someone turned the handle and beat upon the outside of
      the door. Holmes looked swiftly round. The letter which had been
      the messenger of death for Milverton lay, all mottled with his
      blood, upon the table. Holmes tossed it in among the blazing
      papers. Then he drew the key from the outer door, passed through
      after me, and locked it on the outside. “This way, Watson,” said
      he, “we can scale the garden wall in this direction.”

      I could not have believed that an alarm could have spread so
      swiftly. Looking back, the huge house was one blaze of light. The
      front door was open, and figures were rushing down the drive. The
      whole garden was alive with people, and one fellow raised a
      view-halloa as we emerged from the veranda and followed hard at
      our heels. Holmes seemed to know the grounds perfectly, and he
      threaded his way swiftly among a plantation of small trees, I
      close at his heels, and our foremost pursuer panting behind us.
      It was a six-foot wall which barred our path, but he sprang to
      the top and over. As I did the same I felt the hand of the man
      behind me grab at my ankle, but I kicked myself free and
      scrambled over a grass-strewn coping. I fell upon my face among
      some bushes, but Holmes had me on my feet in an instant, and
      together we dashed away across the huge expanse of Hampstead
      Heath. We had run two miles, I suppose, before Holmes at last
      halted and listened intently. All was absolute silence behind us.
      We had shaken off our pursuers and were safe.

      We had breakfasted and were smoking our morning pipe on the day
      after the remarkable experience which I have recorded, when Mr.
      Lestrade, of Scotland Yard, very solemn and impressive, was
      ushered into our modest sitting-room.

      “Good-morning, Mr. Holmes,” said he; “good-morning. May I ask if
      you are very busy just now?”

      “Not too busy to listen to you.”

      “I thought that, perhaps, if you had nothing particular on hand,
      you might care to assist us in a most remarkable case, which
      occurred only last night at Hampstead.”

      “Dear me!” said Holmes. “What was that?”

      “A murder—a most dramatic and remarkable murder. I know how keen
      you are upon these things, and I would take it as a great favour
      if you would step down to Appledore Towers, and give us the
      benefit of your advice. It is no ordinary crime. We have had our
      eyes upon this Mr. Milverton for some time, and, between
      ourselves, he was a bit of a villain. He is known to have held
      papers which he used for blackmailing purposes. These papers have
      all been burned by the murderers. No article of value was taken,
      as it is probable that the criminals were men of good position,
      whose sole object was to prevent social exposure.”

      “Criminals?” said Holmes. “Plural?”

      “Yes, there were two of them. They were as nearly as possible
      captured red-handed. We have their footmarks, we have their
      description, it’s ten to one that we trace them. The first fellow
      was a bit too active, but the second was caught by the
      under-gardener, and only got away after a struggle. He was a
      middle-sized, strongly built man—square jaw, thick neck,
      moustache, a mask over his eyes.”

      “That’s rather vague,” said Sherlock Holmes. “My, it might be a
      description of Watson!”

      “It’s true,” said the inspector, with amusement. “It might be a
      description of Watson.”

      “Well, I’m afraid I can’t help you, Lestrade,” said Holmes. “The
      fact is that I knew this fellow Milverton, that I considered him
      one of the most dangerous men in London, and that I think there
      are certain crimes which the law cannot touch, and which
      therefore, to some extent, justify private revenge. No, it’s no
      use arguing. I have made up my mind. My sympathies are with the
      criminals rather than with the victim, and I will not handle this
      case.”

      Holmes had not said one word to me about the tragedy which we had
      witnessed, but I observed all the morning that he was in his most
      thoughtful mood, and he gave me the impression, from his vacant
      eyes and his abstracted manner, of a man who is striving to
      recall something to his memory. We were in the middle of our
      lunch, when he suddenly sprang to his feet. “By Jove, Watson,
      I’ve got it!” he cried. “Take your hat! Come with me!” He hurried
      at his top speed down Baker Street and along Oxford Street, until
      we had almost reached Regent Circus. Here, on the left hand,
      there stands a shop window filled with photographs of the
      celebrities and beauties of the day. Holmes’s eyes fixed
      themselves upon one of them, and following his gaze I saw the
      picture of a regal and stately lady in Court dress, with a high
      diamond tiara upon her noble head. I looked at that delicately
      curved nose, at the marked eyebrows, at the straight mouth, and
      the strong little chin beneath it. Then I caught my breath as I
      read the time-honoured title of the great nobleman and statesman
      whose wife she had been. My eyes met those of Holmes, and he put
      his finger to his lips as we turned away from the window.




THE ADVENTURE OF THE SIX NAPOLEONS


      It was no very unusual thing for Mr. Lestrade, of Scotland Yard,
      to look in upon us of an evening, and his visits were welcome to
      Sherlock Holmes, for they enabled him to keep in touch with all
      that was going on at the police headquarters. In return for the
      news which Lestrade would bring, Holmes was always ready to
      listen with attention to the details of any case upon which the
      detective was engaged, and was able occasionally, without any
      active interference, to give some hint or suggestion drawn from
      his own vast knowledge and experience.

      On this particular evening, Lestrade had spoken of the weather
      and the newspapers. Then he had fallen silent, puffing
      thoughtfully at his cigar. Holmes looked keenly at him.

      “Anything remarkable on hand?” he asked.

      “Oh, no, Mr. Holmes—nothing very particular.”

      “Then tell me about it.”

      Lestrade laughed.

      “Well, Mr. Holmes, there is no use denying that there _is_
      something on my mind. And yet it is such an absurd business, that
      I hesitated to bother you about it. On the other hand, although
      it is trivial, it is undoubtedly queer, and I know that you have
      a taste for all that is out of the common. But, in my opinion, it
      comes more in Dr. Watson’s line than ours.”

      “Disease?” said I.

      “Madness, anyhow. And a queer madness, too. You wouldn’t think
      there was anyone living at this time of day who had such a hatred
      of Napoleon the First that he would break any image of him that
      he could see.”

      Holmes sank back in his chair.

      “That’s no business of mine,” said he.

      “Exactly. That’s what I said. But then, when the man commits
      burglary in order to break images which are not his own, that
      brings it away from the doctor and on to the policeman.”

      Holmes sat up again.

      “Burglary! This is more interesting. Let me hear the details.”

      Lestrade took out his official notebook and refreshed his memory
      from its pages.

      “The first case reported was four days ago,” said he. “It was at
      the shop of Morse Hudson, who has a place for the sale of
      pictures and statues in the Kennington Road. The assistant had
      left the front shop for an instant, when he heard a crash, and
      hurrying in he found a plaster bust of Napoleon, which stood with
      several other works of art upon the counter, lying shivered into
      fragments. He rushed out into the road, but, although several
      passers-by declared that they had noticed a man run out of the
      shop, he could neither see anyone nor could he find any means of
      identifying the rascal. It seemed to be one of those senseless
      acts of hooliganism which occur from time to time, and it was
      reported to the constable on the beat as such. The plaster cast
      was not worth more than a few shillings, and the whole affair
      appeared to be too childish for any particular investigation.

      “The second case, however, was more serious, and also more
      singular. It occurred only last night.

      “In Kennington Road, and within a few hundred yards of Morse
      Hudson’s shop, there lives a well-known medical practitioner,
      named Dr. Barnicot, who has one of the largest practices upon the
      south side of the Thames. His residence and principal
      consulting-room is at Kennington Road, but he has a branch
      surgery and dispensary at Lower Brixton Road, two miles away.
      This Dr. Barnicot is an enthusiastic admirer of Napoleon, and his
      house is full of books, pictures, and relics of the French
      Emperor. Some little time ago he purchased from Morse Hudson two
      duplicate plaster casts of the famous head of Napoleon by the
      French sculptor, Devine. One of these he placed in his hall in
      the house at Kennington Road, and the other on the mantelpiece of
      the surgery at Lower Brixton. Well, when Dr. Barnicot came down
      this morning he was astonished to find that his house had been
      burgled during the night, but that nothing had been taken save
      the plaster head from the hall. It had been carried out and had
      been dashed savagely against the garden wall, under which its
      splintered fragments were discovered.”

      Holmes rubbed his hands.

      “This is certainly very novel,” said he.

      “I thought it would please you. But I have not got to the end
      yet. Dr. Barnicot was due at his surgery at twelve o’clock, and
      you can imagine his amazement when, on arriving there, he found
      that the window had been opened in the night and that the broken
      pieces of his second bust were strewn all over the room. It had
      been smashed to atoms where it stood. In neither case were there
      any signs which could give us a clue as to the criminal or
      lunatic who had done the mischief. Now, Mr. Holmes, you have got
      the facts.”

      “They are singular, not to say grotesque,” said Holmes. “May I
      ask whether the two busts smashed in Dr. Barnicot’s rooms were
      the exact duplicates of the one which was destroyed in Morse
      Hudson’s shop?”

      “They were taken from the same mould.”

      “Such a fact must tell against the theory that the man who breaks
      them is influenced by any general hatred of Napoleon. Considering
      how many hundreds of statues of the great Emperor must exist in
      London, it is too much to suppose such a coincidence as that a
      promiscuous iconoclast should chance to begin upon three
      specimens of the same bust.”

      “Well, I thought as you do,” said Lestrade. “On the other hand,
      this Morse Hudson is the purveyor of busts in that part of
      London, and these three were the only ones which had been in his
      shop for years. So, although, as you say, there are many hundreds
      of statues in London, it is very probable that these three were
      the only ones in that district. Therefore, a local fanatic would
      begin with them. What do you think, Dr. Watson?”

      “There are no limits to the possibilities of monomania,” I
      answered. “There is the condition which the modern French
      psychologists have called the _idée fixe_, which may be trifling
      in character, and accompanied by complete sanity in every other
      way. A man who had read deeply about Napoleon, or who had
      possibly received some hereditary family injury through the great
      war, might conceivably form such an _idée fixe_ and under its
      influence be capable of any fantastic outrage.”

      “That won’t do, my dear Watson,” said Holmes, shaking his head,
      “for no amount of _idée fixe_ would enable your interesting
      monomaniac to find out where these busts were situated.”

      “Well, how do _you_ explain it?”

      “I don’t attempt to do so. I would only observe that there is a
      certain method in the gentleman’s eccentric proceedings. For
      example, in Dr. Barnicot’s hall, where a sound might arouse the
      family, the bust was taken outside before being broken, whereas
      in the surgery, where there was less danger of an alarm, it was
      smashed where it stood. The affair seems absurdly trifling, and
      yet I dare call nothing trivial when I reflect that some of my
      most classic cases have had the least promising commencement. You
      will remember, Watson, how the dreadful business of the Abernetty
      family was first brought to my notice by the depth which the
      parsley had sunk into the butter upon a hot day. I can’t afford,
      therefore, to smile at your three broken busts, Lestrade, and I
      shall be very much obliged to you if you will let me hear of any
      fresh development of so singular a chain of events.”

      The development for which my friend had asked came in a quicker
      and an infinitely more tragic form than he could have imagined. I
      was still dressing in my bedroom next morning, when there was a
      tap at the door and Holmes entered, a telegram in his hand. He
      read it aloud:

      “Come instantly, 131, Pitt Street, Kensington.—LESTRADE.”

      “What is it, then?” I asked.

      “Don’t know—may be anything. But I suspect it is the sequel of
      the story of the statues. In that case our friend the
      image-breaker has begun operations in another quarter of London.
      There’s coffee on the table, Watson, and I have a cab at the
      door.”

      In half an hour we had reached Pitt Street, a quiet little
      backwater just beside one of the briskest currents of London
      life. No. 131 was one of a row, all flat-chested, respectable,
      and most unromantic dwellings. As we drove up, we found the
      railings in front of the house lined by a curious crowd. Holmes
      whistled.

      “By George! It’s attempted murder at the least. Nothing less will
      hold the London message-boy. There’s a deed of violence indicated
      in that fellow’s round shoulders and outstretched neck. What’s
      this, Watson? The top steps swilled down and the other ones dry.
      Footsteps enough, anyhow! Well, well, there’s Lestrade at the
      front window, and we shall soon know all about it.”

      The official received us with a very grave face and showed us
      into a sitting-room, where an exceedingly unkempt and agitated
      elderly man, clad in a flannel dressing-gown, was pacing up and
      down. He was introduced to us as the owner of the house—Mr.
      Horace Harker, of the Central Press Syndicate.

      “It’s the Napoleon bust business again,” said Lestrade. “You
      seemed interested last night, Mr. Holmes, so I thought perhaps
      you would be glad to be present now that the affair has taken a
      very much graver turn.”

      “What has it turned to, then?”

      “To murder. Mr. Harker, will you tell these gentlemen exactly
      what has occurred?”

      The man in the dressing-gown turned upon us with a most
      melancholy face.

      “It’s an extraordinary thing,” said he, “that all my life I have
      been collecting other people’s news, and now that a real piece of
      news has come my own way I am so confused and bothered that I
      can’t put two words together. If I had come in here as a
      journalist, I should have interviewed myself and had two columns
      in every evening paper. As it is, I am giving away valuable copy
      by telling my story over and over to a string of different
      people, and I can make no use of it myself. However, I’ve heard
      your name, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, and if you’ll only explain this
      queer business, I shall be paid for my trouble in telling you the
      story.”

      Holmes sat down and listened.

      “It all seems to centre round that bust of Napoleon which I
      bought for this very room about four months ago. I picked it up
      cheap from Harding Brothers, two doors from the High Street
      Station. A great deal of my journalistic work is done at night,
      and I often write until the early morning. So it was to-day. I
      was sitting in my den, which is at the back of the top of the
      house, about three o’clock, when I was convinced that I heard
      some sounds downstairs. I listened, but they were not repeated,
      and I concluded that they came from outside. Then suddenly, about
      five minutes later, there came a most horrible yell—the most
      dreadful sound, Mr. Holmes, that ever I heard. It will ring in my
      ears as long as I live. I sat frozen with horror for a minute or
      two. Then I seized the poker and went downstairs. When I entered
      this room I found the window wide open, and I at once observed
      that the bust was gone from the mantelpiece. Why any burglar
      should take such a thing passes my understanding, for it was only
      a plaster cast and of no real value whatever.

      “You can see for yourself that anyone going out through that open
      window could reach the front doorstep by taking a long stride.
      This was clearly what the burglar had done, so I went round and
      opened the door. Stepping out into the dark, I nearly fell over a
      dead man, who was lying there. I ran back for a light and there
      was the poor fellow, a great gash in his throat and the whole
      place swimming in blood. He lay on his back, his knees drawn up,
      and his mouth horribly open. I shall see him in my dreams. I had
      just time to blow on my police-whistle, and then I must have
      fainted, for I knew nothing more until I found the policeman
      standing over me in the hall.”

      “Well, who was the murdered man?” asked Holmes.

      “There’s nothing to show who he was,” said Lestrade. “You shall
      see the body at the mortuary, but we have made nothing of it up
      to now. He is a tall man, sunburned, very powerful, not more than
      thirty. He is poorly dressed, and yet does not appear to be a
      labourer. A horn-handled clasp knife was lying in a pool of blood
      beside him. Whether it was the weapon which did the deed, or
      whether it belonged to the dead man, I do not know. There was no
      name on his clothing, and nothing in his pockets save an apple,
      some string, a shilling map of London, and a photograph. Here it
      is.”

      It was evidently taken by a snapshot from a small camera. It
      represented an alert, sharp-featured simian man, with thick
      eyebrows and a very peculiar projection of the lower part of the
      face, like the muzzle of a baboon.

      “And what became of the bust?” asked Holmes, after a careful
      study of this picture.

      “We had news of it just before you came. It has been found in the
      front garden of an empty house in Campden House Road. It was
      broken into fragments. I am going round now to see it. Will you
      come?”

      “Certainly. I must just take one look round.” He examined the
      carpet and the window. “The fellow had either very long legs or
      was a most active man,” said he. “With an area beneath, it was no
      mean feat to reach that window ledge and open that window.
      Getting back was comparatively simple. Are you coming with us to
      see the remains of your bust, Mr. Harker?”

      The disconsolate journalist had seated himself at a
      writing-table.

      “I must try and make something of it,” said he, “though I have no
      doubt that the first editions of the evening papers are out
      already with full details. It’s like my luck! You remember when
      the stand fell at Doncaster? Well, I was the only journalist in
      the stand, and my journal the only one that had no account of it,
      for I was too shaken to write it. And now I’ll be too late with a
      murder done on my own doorstep.”

      As we left the room, we heard his pen travelling shrilly over the
      foolscap.

      The spot where the fragments of the bust had been found was only
      a few hundred yards away. For the first time our eyes rested upon
      this presentment of the great emperor, which seemed to raise such
      frantic and destructive hatred in the mind of the unknown. It lay
      scattered, in splintered shards, upon the grass. Holmes picked up
      several of them and examined them carefully. I was convinced,
      from his intent face and his purposeful manner, that at last he
      was upon a clue.

      “Well?” asked Lestrade.

      Holmes shrugged his shoulders.

      “We have a long way to go yet,” said he. “And yet—and yet—well,
      we have some suggestive facts to act upon. The possession of this
      trifling bust was worth more, in the eyes of this strange
      criminal, than a human life. That is one point. Then there is the
      singular fact that he did not break it in the house, or
      immediately outside the house, if to break it was his sole
      object.”

      “He was rattled and bustled by meeting this other fellow. He
      hardly knew what he was doing.”

      “Well, that’s likely enough. But I wish to call your attention
      very particularly to the position of this house, in the garden of
      which the bust was destroyed.”

      Lestrade looked about him.

      “It was an empty house, and so he knew that he would not be
      disturbed in the garden.”

      “Yes, but there is another empty house farther up the street
      which he must have passed before he came to this one. Why did he
      not break it there, since it is evident that every yard that he
      carried it increased the risk of someone meeting him?”

      “I give it up,” said Lestrade.

      Holmes pointed to the street lamp above our heads.

      “He could see what he was doing here, and he could not there.
      That was his reason.”

      “By Jove! that’s true,” said the detective. “Now that I come to
      think of it, Dr. Barnicot’s bust was broken not far from his red
      lamp. Well, Mr. Holmes, what are we to do with that fact?”

      “To remember it—to docket it. We may come on something later
      which will bear upon it. What steps do you propose to take now,
      Lestrade?”

      “The most practical way of getting at it, in my opinion, is to
      identify the dead man. There should be no difficulty about that.
      When we have found who he is and who his associates are, we
      should have a good start in learning what he was doing in Pitt
      Street last night, and who it was who met him and killed him on
      the doorstep of Mr. Horace Harker. Don’t you think so?”

      “No doubt; and yet it is not quite the way in which I should
      approach the case.”

      “What would you do then?”

      “Oh, you must not let me influence you in any way. I suggest that
      you go on your line and I on mine. We can compare notes
      afterwards, and each will supplement the other.”

      “Very good,” said Lestrade.

      “If you are going back to Pitt Street, you might see Mr. Horace
      Harker. Tell him for me that I have quite made up my mind, and
      that it is certain that a dangerous homicidal lunatic, with
      Napoleonic delusions, was in his house last night. It will be
      useful for his article.”

      Lestrade stared.

      “You don’t seriously believe that?”

      Holmes smiled.

      “Don’t I? Well, perhaps I don’t. But I am sure that it will
      interest Mr. Horace Harker and the subscribers of the Central
      Press Syndicate. Now, Watson, I think that we shall find that we
      have a long and rather complex day’s work before us. I should be
      glad, Lestrade, if you could make it convenient to meet us at
      Baker Street at six o’clock this evening. Until then I should
      like to keep this photograph, found in the dead man’s pocket. It
      is possible that I may have to ask your company and assistance
      upon a small expedition which will have be undertaken to-night,
      if my chain of reasoning should prove to be correct. Until then
      good-bye and good luck!”

      Sherlock Holmes and I walked together to the High Street, where
      we stopped at the shop of Harding Brothers, whence the bust had
      been purchased. A young assistant informed us that Mr. Harding
      would be absent until afternoon, and that he was himself a
      newcomer, who could give us no information. Holmes’s face showed
      his disappointment and annoyance.

      “Well, well, we can’t expect to have it all our own way, Watson,”
      he said, at last. “We must come back in the afternoon, if Mr.
      Harding will not be here until then. I am, as you have no doubt
      surmised, endeavouring to trace these busts to their source, in
      order to find if there is not something peculiar which may
      account for their remarkable fate. Let us make for Mr. Morse
      Hudson, of the Kennington Road, and see if he can throw any light
      upon the problem.”

      A drive of an hour brought us to the picture-dealer’s
      establishment. He was a small, stout man with a red face and a
      peppery manner.

      “Yes, sir. On my very counter, sir,” said he. “What we pay rates
      and taxes for I don’t know, when any ruffian can come in and
      break one’s goods. Yes, sir, it was I who sold Dr. Barnicot his
      two statues. Disgraceful, sir! A Nihilist plot—that’s what I make
      it. No one but an anarchist would go about breaking statues. Red
      republicans—that’s what I call ’em. Who did I get the statues
      from? I don’t see what that has to do with it. Well, if you
      really want to know, I got them from Gelder & Co., in Church
      Street, Stepney. They are a well-known house in the trade, and
      have been this twenty years. How many had I? Three—two and one
      are three—two of Dr. Barnicot’s, and one smashed in broad
      daylight on my own counter. Do I know that photograph? No, I
      don’t. Yes, I do, though. Why, it’s Beppo. He was a kind of
      Italian piece-work man, who made himself useful in the shop. He
      could carve a bit, and gild and frame, and do odd jobs. The
      fellow left me last week, and I’ve heard nothing of him since.
      No, I don’t know where he came from nor where he went to. I had
      nothing against him while he was here. He was gone two days
      before the bust was smashed.”

      “Well, that’s all we could reasonably expect from Morse Hudson,”
      said Holmes, as we emerged from the shop. “We have this Beppo as
      a common factor, both in Kennington and in Kensington, so that is
      worth a ten-mile drive. Now, Watson, let us make for Gelder &
      Co., of Stepney, the source and origin of the busts. I shall be
      surprised if we don’t get some help down there.”

      In rapid succession we passed through the fringe of fashionable
      London, hotel London, theatrical London, literary London,
      commercial London, and, finally, maritime London, till we came to
      a riverside city of a hundred thousand souls, where the tenement
      houses swelter and reek with the outcasts of Europe. Here, in a
      broad thoroughfare, once the abode of wealthy City merchants, we
      found the sculpture works for which we searched. Outside was a
      considerable yard full of monumental masonry. Inside was a large
      room in which fifty workers were carving or moulding. The
      manager, a big blond German, received us civilly and gave a clear
      answer to all Holmes’s questions. A reference to his books showed
      that hundreds of casts had been taken from a marble copy of
      Devine’s head of Napoleon, but that the three which had been sent
      to Morse Hudson a year or so before had been half of a batch of
      six, the other three being sent to Harding Brothers, of
      Kensington. There was no reason why those six should be different
      from any of the other casts. He could suggest no possible cause
      why anyone should wish to destroy them—in fact, he laughed at the
      idea. Their wholesale price was six shillings, but the retailer
      would get twelve or more. The cast was taken in two moulds from
      each side of the face, and then these two profiles of plaster of
      Paris were joined together to make the complete bust. The work
      was usually done by Italians, in the room we were in. When
      finished, the busts were put on a table in the passage to dry,
      and afterwards stored. That was all he could tell us.

      But the production of the photograph had a remarkable effect upon
      the manager. His face flushed with anger, and his brows knotted
      over his blue Teutonic eyes.

      “Ah, the rascal!” he cried. “Yes, indeed, I know him very well.
      This has always been a respectable establishment, and the only
      time that we have ever had the police in it was over this very
      fellow. It was more than a year ago now. He knifed another
      Italian in the street, and then he came to the works with the
      police on his heels, and he was taken here. Beppo was his
      name—his second name I never knew. Serve me right for engaging a
      man with such a face. But he was a good workman—one of the best.”

      “What did he get?”

      “The man lived and he got off with a year. I have no doubt he is
      out now, but he has not dared to show his nose here. We have a
      cousin of his here, and I daresay he could tell you where he is.”

      “No, no,” cried Holmes, “not a word to the cousin—not a word, I
      beg of you. The matter is very important, and the farther I go
      with it, the more important it seems to grow. When you referred
      in your ledger to the sale of those casts I observed that the
      date was June 3rd of last year. Could you give me the date when
      Beppo was arrested?”

      “I could tell you roughly by the pay-list,” the manager answered.
      “Yes,” he continued, after some turning over of pages, “he was
      paid last on May 20th.”

      “Thank you,” said Holmes. “I don’t think that I need intrude upon
      your time and patience any more.” With a last word of caution
      that he should say nothing as to our researches, we turned our
      faces westward once more.

      The afternoon was far advanced before we were able to snatch a
      hasty luncheon at a restaurant. A news-bill at the entrance
      announced “Kensington Outrage. Murder by a Madman,” and the
      contents of the paper showed that Mr. Horace Harker had got his
      account into print after all. Two columns were occupied with a
      highly sensational and flowery rendering of the whole incident.
      Holmes propped it against the cruet-stand and read it while he
      ate. Once or twice he chuckled.

      “This is all right, Watson,” said he. “Listen to this:

      “It is satisfactory to know that there can be no difference of
      opinion upon this case, since Mr. Lestrade, one of the most
      experienced members of the official force, and Mr. Sherlock
      Holmes, the well-known consulting expert, have each come to the
      conclusion that the grotesque series of incidents, which have
      ended in so tragic a fashion, arise from lunacy rather than from
      deliberate crime. No explanation save mental aberration can cover
      the facts.

      “The Press, Watson, is a most valuable institution, if you only
      know how to use it. And now, if you have quite finished, we will
      hark back to Kensington and see what the manager of Harding
      Brothers has to say on the matter.”

      The founder of that great emporium proved to be a brisk, crisp
      little person, very dapper and quick, with a clear head and a
      ready tongue.

      “Yes, sir, I have already read the account in the evening papers.
      Mr. Horace Harker is a customer of ours. We supplied him with the
      bust some months ago. We ordered three busts of that sort from
      Gelder & Co., of Stepney. They are all sold now. To whom? Oh, I
      daresay by consulting our sales book we could very easily tell
      you. Yes, we have the entries here. One to Mr. Harker you see,
      and one to Mr. Josiah Brown, of Laburnum Lodge, Laburnum Vale,
      Chiswick, and one to Mr. Sandeford, of Lower Grove Road, Reading.
      No, I have never seen this face which you show me in the
      photograph. You would hardly forget it, would you, sir, for I’ve
      seldom seen an uglier. Have we any Italians on the staff? Yes,
      sir, we have several among our workpeople and cleaners. I daresay
      they might get a peep at that sales book if they wanted to. There
      is no particular reason for keeping a watch upon that book. Well,
      well, it’s a very strange business, and I hope that you will let
      me know if anything comes of your inquiries.”

      Holmes had taken several notes during Mr. Harding’s evidence, and
      I could see that he was thoroughly satisfied by the turn which
      affairs were taking. He made no remark, however, save that,
      unless we hurried, we should be late for our appointment with
      Lestrade. Sure enough, when we reached Baker Street the detective
      was already there, and we found him pacing up and down in a fever
      of impatience. His look of importance showed that his day’s work
      had not been in vain.

      “Well?” he asked. “What luck, Mr. Holmes?”

      “We have had a very busy day, and not entirely a wasted one,” my
      friend explained. “We have seen both the retailers and also the
      wholesale manufacturers. I can trace each of the busts now from
      the beginning.”

      “The busts,” cried Lestrade. “Well, well, you have your own
      methods, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, and it is not for me to say a word
      against them, but I think I have done a better day’s work than
      you. I have identified the dead man.”

      “You don’t say so?”

      “And found a cause for the crime.”

      “Splendid!”

      “We have an inspector who makes a specialty of Saffron Hill and
      the Italian Quarter. Well, this dead man had some Catholic emblem
      round his neck, and that, along with his colour, made me think he
      was from the South. Inspector Hill knew him the moment he caught
      sight of him. His name is Pietro Venucci, from Naples, and he is
      one of the greatest cut-throats in London. He is connected with
      the Mafia, which, as you know, is a secret political society,
      enforcing its decrees by murder. Now, you see how the affair
      begins to clear up. The other fellow is probably an Italian also,
      and a member of the Mafia. He has broken the rules in some
      fashion. Pietro is set upon his track. Probably the photograph we
      found in his pocket is the man himself, so that he may not knife
      the wrong person. He dogs the fellow, he sees him enter a house,
      he waits outside for him, and in the scuffle he receives his own
      death-wound. How is that, Mr. Sherlock Holmes?”

      Holmes clapped his hands approvingly.

      “Excellent, Lestrade, excellent!” he cried. “But I didn’t quite
      follow your explanation of the destruction of the busts.”

      “The busts! You never can get those busts out of your head. After
      all, that is nothing; petty larceny, six months at the most. It
      is the murder that we are really investigating, and I tell you
      that I am gathering all the threads into my hands.”

      “And the next stage?”

      “Is a very simple one. I shall go down with Hill to the Italian
      Quarter, find the man whose photograph we have got, and arrest
      him on the charge of murder. Will you come with us?”

      “I think not. I fancy we can attain our end in a simpler way. I
      can’t say for certain, because it all depends—well, it all
      depends upon a factor which is completely outside our control.
      But I have great hopes—in fact, the betting is exactly two to
      one—that if you will come with us to-night I shall be able to
      help you to lay him by the heels.”

      “In the Italian Quarter?”

      “No, I fancy Chiswick is an address which is more likely to find
      him. If you will come with me to Chiswick to-night, Lestrade,
      I’ll promise to go to the Italian Quarter with you to-morrow, and
      no harm will be done by the delay. And now I think that a few
      hours’ sleep would do us all good, for I do not propose to leave
      before eleven o’clock, and it is unlikely that we shall be back
      before morning. You’ll dine with us, Lestrade, and then you are
      welcome to the sofa until it is time for us to start. In the
      meantime, Watson, I should be glad if you would ring for an
      express messenger, for I have a letter to send and it is
      important that it should go at once.”

      Holmes spent the evening in rummaging among the files of the old
      daily papers with which one of our lumber-rooms was packed. When
      at last he descended, it was with triumph in his eyes, but he
      said nothing to either of us as to the result of his researches.
      For my own part, I had followed step by step the methods by which
      he had traced the various windings of this complex case, and,
      though I could not yet perceive the goal which we would reach, I
      understood clearly that Holmes expected this grotesque criminal
      to make an attempt upon the two remaining busts, one of which, I
      remembered, was at Chiswick. No doubt the object of our journey
      was to catch him in the very act, and I could not but admire the
      cunning with which my friend had inserted a wrong clue in the
      evening paper, so as to give the fellow the idea that he could
      continue his scheme with impunity. I was not surprised when
      Holmes suggested that I should take my revolver with me. He had
      himself picked up the loaded hunting-crop, which was his
      favourite weapon.

      A four-wheeler was at the door at eleven, and in it we drove to a
      spot at the other side of Hammersmith Bridge. Here the cabman was
      directed to wait. A short walk brought us to a secluded road
      fringed with pleasant houses, each standing in its own grounds.
      In the light of a street lamp we read “Laburnum Villa” upon the
      gate-post of one of them. The occupants had evidently retired to
      rest, for all was dark save for a fanlight over the hall door,
      which shed a single blurred circle on to the garden path. The
      wooden fence which separated the grounds from the road threw a
      dense black shadow upon the inner side, and here it was that we
      crouched.

      “I fear that you’ll have a long wait,” Holmes whispered. “We may
      thank our stars that it is not raining. I don’t think we can even
      venture to smoke to pass the time. However, it’s a two to one
      chance that we get something to pay us for our trouble.”

      It proved, however, that our vigil was not to be so long as
      Holmes had led us to fear, and it ended in a very sudden and
      singular fashion. In an instant, without the least sound to warn
      us of his coming, the garden gate swung open, and a lithe, dark
      figure, as swift and active as an ape, rushed up the garden path.
      We saw it whisk past the light thrown from over the door and
      disappear against the black shadow of the house. There was a long
      pause, during which we held our breath, and then a very gentle
      creaking sound came to our ears. The window was being opened. The
      noise ceased, and again there was a long silence. The fellow was
      making his way into the house. We saw the sudden flash of a dark
      lantern inside the room. What he sought was evidently not there,
      for again we saw the flash through another blind, and then
      through another.

      “Let us get to the open window. We will nab him as he climbs
      out,” Lestrade whispered.

      But before we could move, the man had emerged again. As he came
      out into the glimmering patch of light, we saw that he carried
      something white under his arm. He looked stealthily all round
      him. The silence of the deserted street reassured him. Turning
      his back upon us he laid down his burden, and the next instant
      there was the sound of a sharp tap, followed by a clatter and
      rattle. The man was so intent upon what he was doing that he
      never heard our steps as we stole across the grass plot. With the
      bound of a tiger Holmes was on his back, and an instant later
      Lestrade and I had him by either wrist, and the handcuffs had
      been fastened. As we turned him over I saw a hideous, sallow
      face, with writhing, furious features, glaring up at us, and I
      knew that it was indeed the man of the photograph whom we had
      secured.

      But it was not our prisoner to whom Holmes was giving his
      attention. Squatted on the doorstep, he was engaged in most
      carefully examining that which the man had brought from the
      house. It was a bust of Napoleon, like the one which we had seen
      that morning, and it had been broken into similar fragments.
      Carefully Holmes held each separate shard to the light, but in no
      way did it differ from any other shattered piece of plaster. He
      had just completed his examination when the hall lights flew up,
      the door opened, and the owner of the house, a jovial, rotund
      figure in shirt and trousers, presented himself.

      “Mr. Josiah Brown, I suppose?” said Holmes.

      “Yes, sir; and you, no doubt, are Mr. Sherlock Holmes? I had the
      note which you sent by the express messenger, and I did exactly
      what you told me. We locked every door on the inside and awaited
      developments. Well, I’m very glad to see that you have got the
      rascal. I hope, gentlemen, that you will come in and have some
      refreshment.”

      However, Lestrade was anxious to get his man into safe quarters,
      so within a few minutes our cab had been summoned and we were all
      four upon our way to London. Not a word would our captive say,
      but he glared at us from the shadow of his matted hair, and once,
      when my hand seemed within his reach, he snapped at it like a
      hungry wolf. We stayed long enough at the police-station to learn
      that a search of his clothing revealed nothing save a few
      shillings and a long sheath knife, the handle of which bore
      copious traces of recent blood.

      “That’s all right,” said Lestrade, as we parted. “Hill knows all
      these gentry, and he will give a name to him. You’ll find that my
      theory of the Mafia will work out all right. But I’m sure I am
      exceedingly obliged to you, Mr. Holmes, for the workmanlike way
      in which you laid hands upon him. I don’t quite understand it all
      yet.”

      “I fear it is rather too late an hour for explanations,” said
      Holmes. “Besides, there are one or two details which are not
      finished off, and it is one of those cases which are worth
      working out to the very end. If you will come round once more to
      my rooms at six o’clock to-morrow, I think I shall be able to
      show you that even now you have not grasped the entire meaning of
      this business, which presents some features which make it
      absolutely original in the history of crime. If ever I permit you
      to chronicle any more of my little problems, Watson, I foresee
      that you will enliven your pages by an account of the singular
      adventure of the Napoleonic busts.”

      When we met again next evening, Lestrade was furnished with much
      information concerning our prisoner. His name, it appeared, was
      Beppo, second name unknown. He was a well-known ne’er-do-well
      among the Italian colony. He had once been a skilful sculptor and
      had earned an honest living, but he had taken to evil courses and
      had twice already been in jail—once for a petty theft, and once,
      as we had already heard, for stabbing a fellow-countryman. He
      could talk English perfectly well. His reasons for destroying the
      busts were still unknown, and he refused to answer any questions
      upon the subject, but the police had discovered that these same
      busts might very well have been made by his own hands, since he
      was engaged in this class of work at the establishment of Gelder
      & Co. To all this information, much of which we already knew,
      Holmes listened with polite attention, but I, who knew him so
      well, could clearly see that his thoughts were elsewhere, and I
      detected a mixture of mingled uneasiness and expectation beneath
      that mask which he was wont to assume. At last he started in his
      chair, and his eyes brightened. There had been a ring at the
      bell. A minute later we heard steps upon the stairs, and an
      elderly red-faced man with grizzled side-whiskers was ushered in.
      In his right hand he carried an old-fashioned carpet-bag, which
      he placed upon the table.

      “Is Mr. Sherlock Holmes here?”

      My friend bowed and smiled. “Mr. Sandeford, of Reading, I
      suppose?” said he.

      “Yes, sir, I fear that I am a little late, but the trains were
      awkward. You wrote to me about a bust that is in my possession.”

      “Exactly.”

      “I have your letter here. You said, ‘I desire to possess a copy
      of Devine’s Napoleon, and am prepared to pay you ten pounds for
      the one which is in your possession.’ Is that right?”

      “Certainly.”

      “I was very much surprised at your letter, for I could not
      imagine how you knew that I owned such a thing.”

      “Of course you must have been surprised, but the explanation is
      very simple. Mr. Harding, of Harding Brothers, said that they had
      sold you their last copy, and he gave me your address.”

      “Oh, that was it, was it? Did he tell you what I paid for it?”

      “No, he did not.”

      “Well, I am an honest man, though not a very rich one. I only
      gave fifteen shillings for the bust, and I think you ought to
      know that before I take ten pounds from you.

      “I am sure the scruple does you honour, Mr. Sandeford. But I have
      named that price, so I intend to stick to it.”

      “Well, it is very handsome of you, Mr. Holmes. I brought the bust
      up with me, as you asked me to do. Here it is!” He opened his
      bag, and at last we saw placed upon our table a complete specimen
      of that bust which we had already seen more than once in
      fragments.

      Holmes took a paper from his pocket and laid a ten-pound note
      upon the table.

      “You will kindly sign that paper, Mr. Sandeford, in the presence
      of these witnesses. It is simply to say that you transfer every
      possible right that you ever had in the bust to me. I am a
      methodical man, you see, and you never know what turn events
      might take afterwards. Thank you, Mr. Sandeford; here is your
      money, and I wish you a very good evening.”

      When our visitor had disappeared, Sherlock Holmes’s movements
      were such as to rivet our attention. He began by taking a clean
      white cloth from a drawer and laying it over the table. Then he
      placed his newly acquired bust in the centre of the cloth.
      Finally, he picked up his hunting-crop and struck Napoleon a
      sharp blow on the top of the head. The figure broke into
      fragments, and Holmes bent eagerly over the shattered remains.
      Next instant, with a loud shout of triumph he held up one
      splinter, in which a round, dark object was fixed like a plum in
      a pudding.

      “Gentlemen,” he cried, “let me introduce you to the famous black
      pearl of the Borgias.”

      Lestrade and I sat silent for a moment, and then, with a
      spontaneous impulse, we both broke at clapping, as at the
      well-wrought crisis of a play. A flush of colour sprang to
      Holmes’s pale cheeks, and he bowed to us like the master
      dramatist who receives the homage of his audience. It was at such
      moments that for an instant he ceased to be a reasoning machine,
      and betrayed his human love for admiration and applause. The same
      singularly proud and reserved nature which turned away with
      disdain from popular notoriety was capable of being moved to its
      depths by spontaneous wonder and praise from a friend.

      “Yes, gentlemen,” said he, “it is the most famous pearl now
      existing in the world, and it has been my good fortune, by a
      connected chain of inductive reasoning, to trace it from the
      Prince of Colonna’s bedroom at the Dacre Hotel, where it was
      lost, to the interior of this, the last of the six busts of
      Napoleon which were manufactured by Gelder & Co., of Stepney. You
      will remember, Lestrade, the sensation caused by the
      disappearance of this valuable jewel and the vain efforts of the
      London police to recover it. I was myself consulted upon the
      case, but I was unable to throw any light upon it. Suspicion fell
      upon the maid of the Princess, who was an Italian, and it was
      proved that she had a brother in London, but we failed to trace
      any connection between them. The maid’s name was Lucretia
      Venucci, and there is no doubt in my mind that this Pietro who
      was murdered two nights ago was the brother. I have been looking
      up the dates in the old files of the paper, and I find that the
      disappearance of the pearl was exactly two days before the arrest
      of Beppo, for some crime of violence—an event which took place in
      the factory of Gelder & Co., at the very moment when these busts
      were being made. Now you clearly see the sequence of events,
      though you see them, of course, in the inverse order to the way
      in which they presented themselves to me. Beppo had the pearl in
      his possession. He may have stolen it from Pietro, he may have
      been Pietro’s confederate, he may have been the go-between of
      Pietro and his sister. It is of no consequence to us which is the
      correct solution.

      “The main fact is that he _had_ the pearl, and at that moment,
      when it was on his person, he was pursued by the police. He made
      for the factory in which he worked, and he knew that he had only
      a few minutes in which to conceal this enormously valuable prize,
      which would otherwise be found on him when he was searched. Six
      plaster casts of Napoleon were drying in the passage. One of them
      was still soft. In an instant Beppo, a skilful workman, made a
      small hole in the wet plaster, dropped in the pearl, and with a
      few touches covered over the aperture once more. It was an
      admirable hiding-place. No one could possibly find it. But Beppo
      was condemned to a year’s imprisonment, and in the meanwhile his
      six busts were scattered over London. He could not tell which
      contained his treasure. Only by breaking them could he see. Even
      shaking would tell him nothing, for as the plaster was wet it was
      probable that the pearl would adhere to it—as, in fact, it has
      done. Beppo did not despair, and he conducted his search with
      considerable ingenuity and perseverance. Through a cousin who
      works with Gelder, he found out the retail firms who had bought
      the busts. He managed to find employment with Morse Hudson, and
      in that way tracked down three of them. The pearl was not there.
      Then, with the help of some Italian employee, he succeeded in
      finding out where the other three busts had gone. The first was
      at Harker’s. There he was dogged by his confederate, who held
      Beppo responsible for the loss of the pearl, and he stabbed him
      in the scuffle which followed.”

      “If he was his confederate, why should he carry his photograph?”
      I asked.

      “As a means of tracing him, if he wished to inquire about him
      from any third person. That was the obvious reason. Well, after
      the murder I calculated that Beppo would probably hurry rather
      than delay his movements. He would fear that the police would
      read his secret, and so he hastened on before they should get
      ahead of him. Of course, I could not say that he had not found
      the pearl in Harker’s bust. I had not even concluded for certain
      that it was the pearl, but it was evident to me that he was
      looking for something, since he carried the bust past the other
      houses in order to break it in the garden which had a lamp
      overlooking it. Since Harker’s bust was one in three, the chances
      were exactly as I told you—two to one against the pearl being
      inside it. There remained two busts, and it was obvious that he
      would go for the London one first. I warned the inmates of the
      house, so as to avoid a second tragedy, and we went down, with
      the happiest results. By that time, of course, I knew for certain
      that it was the Borgia pearl that we were after. The name of the
      murdered man linked the one event with the other. There only
      remained a single bust—the Reading one—and the pearl must be
      there. I bought it in your presence from the owner—and there it
      lies.”

      We sat in silence for a moment.

      “Well,” said Lestrade, “I’ve seen you handle a good many cases,
      Mr. Holmes, but I don’t know that I ever knew a more workmanlike
      one than that. We’re not jealous of you at Scotland Yard. No,
      sir, we are very proud of you, and if you come down to-morrow,
      there’s not a man, from the oldest inspector to the youngest
      constable, who wouldn’t be glad to shake you by the hand.”

      “Thank you!” said Holmes. “Thank you!” and as he turned away, it
      seemed to me that he was more nearly moved by the softer human
      emotions than I had ever seen him. A moment later he was the cold
      and practical thinker once more. “Put the pearl in the safe,
      Watson,” said he, “and get out the papers of the Conk-Singleton
      forgery case. Good-bye, Lestrade. If any little problem comes
      your way, I shall be happy, if I can, to give you a hint or two
      as to its solution.”




THE ADVENTURE OF THE THREE STUDENTS


      It was in the year ’95 that a combination of events, into which I
      need not enter, caused Mr. Sherlock Holmes and myself to spend
      some weeks in one of our great university towns, and it was
      during this time that the small but instructive adventure which I
      am about to relate befell us. It will be obvious that any details
      which would help the reader exactly to identify the college or
      the criminal would be injudicious and offensive. So painful a
      scandal may well be allowed to die out. With due discretion the
      incident itself may, however, be described, since it serves to
      illustrate some of those qualities for which my friend was
      remarkable. I will endeavour, in my statement, to avoid such
      terms as would serve to limit the events to any particular place,
      or give a clue as to the people concerned.

      We were residing at the time in furnished lodgings close to a
      library where Sherlock Holmes was pursuing some laborious
      researches in early English charters—researches which led to
      results so striking that they may be the subject of one of my
      future narratives. Here it was that one evening we received a
      visit from an acquaintance, Mr. Hilton Soames, tutor and lecturer
      at the College of St. Luke’s. Mr. Soames was a tall, spare man,
      of a nervous and excitable temperament. I had always known him to
      be restless in his manner, but on this particular occasion he was
      in such a state of uncontrollable agitation that it was clear
      something very unusual had occurred.

      “I trust, Mr. Holmes, that you can spare me a few hours of your
      valuable time. We have had a very painful incident at St. Luke’s,
      and really, but for the happy chance of your being in town, I
      should have been at a loss what to do.”

      “I am very busy just now, and I desire no distractions,” my
      friend answered. “I should much prefer that you called in the aid
      of the police.”

      “No, no, my dear sir; such a course is utterly impossible. When
      once the law is evoked it cannot be stayed again, and this is
      just one of those cases where, for the credit of the college, it
      is most essential to avoid scandal. Your discretion is as
      well-known as your powers, and you are the one man in the world
      who can help me. I beg you, Mr. Holmes, to do what you can.”

      My friend’s temper had not improved since he had been deprived of
      the congenial surroundings of Baker Street. Without his
      scrapbooks, his chemicals, and his homely untidiness, he was an
      uncomfortable man. He shrugged his shoulders in ungracious
      acquiescence, while our visitor in hurried words and with much
      excitable gesticulation poured forth his story.

      “I must explain to you, Mr. Holmes, that to-morrow is the first
      day of the examination for the Fortescue Scholarship. I am one of
      the examiners. My subject is Greek, and the first of the papers
      consists of a large passage of Greek translation which the
      candidate has not seen. This passage is printed on the
      examination paper, and it would naturally be an immense advantage
      if the candidate could prepare it in advance. For this reason,
      great care is taken to keep the paper secret.

      “To-day, about three o’clock, the proofs of this paper arrived
      from the printers. The exercise consists of half a chapter of
      Thucydides. I had to read it over carefully, as the text must be
      absolutely correct. At four-thirty my task was not yet completed.
      I had, however, promised to take tea in a friend’s rooms, so I
      left the proof upon my desk. I was absent rather more than an
      hour.

      “You are aware, Mr. Holmes, that our college doors are double—a
      green baize one within and a heavy oak one without. As I
      approached my outer door, I was amazed to see a key in it. For an
      instant I imagined that I had left my own there, but on feeling
      in my pocket I found that it was all right. The only duplicate
      which existed, so far as I knew, was that which belonged to my
      servant, Bannister—a man who has looked after my room for ten
      years, and whose honesty is absolutely above suspicion. I found
      that the key was indeed his, that he had entered my room to know
      if I wanted tea, and that he had very carelessly left the key in
      the door when he came out. His visit to my room must have been
      within a very few minutes of my leaving it. His forgetfulness
      about the key would have mattered little upon any other occasion,
      but on this one day it has produced the most deplorable
      consequences.

      “The moment I looked at my table, I was aware that someone had
      rummaged among my papers. The proof was in three long slips. I
      had left them all together. Now, I found that one of them was
      lying on the floor, one was on the side table near the window,
      and the third was where I had left it.”

      Holmes stirred for the first time.

      “The first page on the floor, the second in the window, the third
      where you left it,” said he.

      “Exactly, Mr. Holmes. You amaze me. How could you possibly know
      that?”

      “Pray continue your very interesting statement.”

      “For an instant I imagined that Bannister had taken the
      unpardonable liberty of examining my papers. He denied it,
      however, with the utmost earnestness, and I am convinced that he
      was speaking the truth. The alternative was that someone passing
      had observed the key in the door, had known that I was out, and
      had entered to look at the papers. A large sum of money is at
      stake, for the scholarship is a very valuable one, and an
      unscrupulous man might very well run a risk in order to gain an
      advantage over his fellows.

      “Bannister was very much upset by the incident. He had nearly
      fainted when we found that the papers had undoubtedly been
      tampered with. I gave him a little brandy and left him collapsed
      in a chair, while I made a most careful examination of the room.
      I soon saw that the intruder had left other traces of his
      presence besides the rumpled papers. On the table in the window
      were several shreds from a pencil which had been sharpened. A
      broken tip of lead was lying there also. Evidently the rascal had
      copied the paper in a great hurry, had broken his pencil, and had
      been compelled to put a fresh point to it.”

      “Excellent!” said Holmes, who was recovering his good-humour as
      his attention became more engrossed by the case. “Fortune has
      been your friend.”

      “This was not all. I have a new writing-table with a fine surface
      of red leather. I am prepared to swear, and so is Bannister, that
      it was smooth and unstained. Now I found a clean cut in it about
      three inches long—not a mere scratch, but a positive cut. Not
      only this, but on the table I found a small ball of black dough
      or clay, with specks of something which looks like sawdust in it.
      I am convinced that these marks were left by the man who rifled
      the papers. There were no footmarks and no other evidence as to
      his identity. I was at my wits’ end, when suddenly the happy
      thought occurred to me that you were in the town, and I came
      straight round to put the matter into your hands. Do help me, Mr.
      Holmes. You see my dilemma. Either I must find the man or else
      the examination must be postponed until fresh papers are
      prepared, and since this cannot be done without explanation,
      there will ensue a hideous scandal, which will throw a cloud not
      only on the college, but on the university. Above all things, I
      desire to settle the matter quietly and discreetly.”

      “I shall be happy to look into it and to give you such advice as
      I can,” said Holmes, rising and putting on his overcoat. “The
      case is not entirely devoid of interest. Had anyone visited you
      in your room after the papers came to you?”

      “Yes, young Daulat Ras, an Indian student, who lives on the same
      stair, came in to ask me some particulars about the examination.”

      “For which he was entered?”

      “Yes.”

      “And the papers were on your table?”

      “To the best of my belief, they were rolled up.”

      “But might be recognized as proofs?”

      “Possibly.”

      “No one else in your room?”

      “No.”

      “Did anyone know that these proofs would be there?”

      “No one save the printer.”

      “Did this man Bannister know?”

      “No, certainly not. No one knew.”

      “Where is Bannister now?”

      “He was very ill, poor fellow. I left him collapsed in the chair.
      I was in such a hurry to come to you.”

      “You left your door open?”

      “I locked up the papers first.”

      “Then it amounts to this, Mr. Soames: that, unless the Indian
      student recognized the roll as being proofs, the man who tampered
      with them came upon them accidentally without knowing that they
      were there.”

      “So it seems to me.”

      Holmes gave an enigmatic smile.

      “Well,” said he, “let us go round. Not one of your cases,
      Watson—mental, not physical. All right; come if you want to. Now,
      Mr. Soames—at your disposal!”

      The sitting-room of our client opened by a long, low, latticed
      window on to the ancient lichen-tinted court of the old college.
      A Gothic arched door led to a worn stone staircase. On the ground
      floor was the tutor’s room. Above were three students, one on
      each story. It was already twilight when we reached the scene of
      our problem. Holmes halted and looked earnestly at the window.
      Then he approached it, and, standing on tiptoe with his neck
      craned, he looked into the room.

      “He must have entered through the door. There is no opening
      except the one pane,” said our learned guide.

      “Dear me!” said Holmes, and he smiled in a singular way as he
      glanced at our companion. “Well, if there is nothing to be
      learned here, we had best go inside.”

      The lecturer unlocked the outer door and ushered us into his
      room. We stood at the entrance while Holmes made an examination
      of the carpet.

      “I am afraid there are no signs here,” said he. “One could hardly
      hope for any upon so dry a day. Your servant seems to have quite
      recovered. You left him in a chair, you say. Which chair?”

      “By the window there.”

      “I see. Near this little table. You can come in now. I have
      finished with the carpet. Let us take the little table first. Of
      course, what has happened is very clear. The man entered and took
      the papers, sheet by sheet, from the central table. He carried
      them over to the window table, because from there he could see if
      you came across the courtyard, and so could effect an escape.”

      “As a matter of fact, he could not,” said Soames, “for I entered
      by the side door.”

      “Ah, that’s good! Well, anyhow, that was in his mind. Let me see
      the three strips. No finger impressions—no! Well, he carried over
      this one first, and he copied it. How long would it take him to
      do that, using every possible contraction? A quarter of an hour,
      not less. Then he tossed it down and seized the next. He was in
      the midst of that when your return caused him to make a very
      hurried retreat—_very_ hurried, since he had not time to replace
      the papers which would tell you that he had been there. You were
      not aware of any hurrying feet on the stair as you entered the
      outer door?”

      “No, I can’t say I was.”

      “Well, he wrote so furiously that he broke his pencil, and had,
      as you observe, to sharpen it again. This is of interest, Watson.
      The pencil was not an ordinary one. It was above the usual size,
      with a soft lead, the outer colour was dark blue, the maker’s
      name was printed in silver lettering, and the piece remaining is
      only about an inch and a half long. Look for such a pencil, Mr.
      Soames, and you have got your man. When I add that he possesses a
      large and very blunt knife, you have an additional aid.”

      Mr. Soames was somewhat overwhelmed by this flood of information.
      “I can follow the other points,” said he, “but really, in this
      matter of the length——”

      Holmes held out a small chip with the letters NN and a space of
      clear wood after them.

      “You see?”

      “No, I fear that even now——”

      “Watson, I have always done you an injustice. There are others.
      What could this NN be? It is at the end of a word. You are aware
      that Johann Faber is the most common maker’s name. Is it not
      clear that there is just as much of the pencil left as usually
      follows the Johann?” He held the small table sideways to the
      electric light. “I was hoping that if the paper on which he wrote
      was thin, some trace of it might come through upon this polished
      surface. No, I see nothing. I don’t think there is anything more
      to be learned here. Now for the central table. This small pellet
      is, I presume, the black, doughy mass you spoke of. Roughly
      pyramidal in shape and hollowed out, I perceive. As you say,
      there appear to be grains of sawdust in it. Dear me, this is very
      interesting. And the cut—a positive tear, I see. It began with a
      thin scratch and ended in a jagged hole. I am much indebted to
      you for directing my attention to this case, Mr. Soames. Where
      does that door lead to?”

      “To my bedroom.”

      “Have you been in it since your adventure?”

      “No, I came straight away for you.”

      “I should like to have a glance round. What a charming,
      old-fashioned room! Perhaps you will kindly wait a minute, until
      I have examined the floor. No, I see nothing. What about this
      curtain? You hang your clothes behind it. If anyone were forced
      to conceal himself in this room he must do it there, since the
      bed is too low and the wardrobe too shallow. No one there, I
      suppose?”

      As Holmes drew the curtain I was aware, from some little rigidity
      and alertness of his attitude, that he was prepared for an
      emergency. As a matter of fact, the drawn curtain disclosed
      nothing but three or four suits of clothes hanging from a line of
      pegs. Holmes turned away, and stooped suddenly to the floor.

      “Halloa! What’s this?” said he.

      It was a small pyramid of black, putty-like stuff, exactly like
      the one upon the table of the study. Holmes held it out on his
      open palm in the glare of the electric light.

      “Your visitor seems to have left traces in your bedroom as well
      as in your sitting-room, Mr. Soames.”

      “What could he have wanted there?”

      “I think it is clear enough. You came back by an unexpected way,
      and so he had no warning until you were at the very door. What
      could he do? He caught up everything which would betray him, and
      he rushed into your bedroom to conceal himself.”

      “Good gracious, Mr. Holmes, do you mean to tell me that, all the
      time I was talking to Bannister in this room, we had the man
      prisoner if we had only known it?”

      “So I read it.”

      “Surely there is another alternative, Mr. Holmes. I don’t know
      whether you observed my bedroom window?”

      “Lattice-paned, lead framework, three separate windows, one
      swinging on hinge, and large enough to admit a man.”

      “Exactly. And it looks out on an angle of the courtyard so as to
      be partly invisible. The man might have effected his entrance
      there, left traces as he passed through the bedroom, and finally,
      finding the door open, have escaped that way.”

      Holmes shook his head impatiently.

      “Let us be practical,” said he. “I understand you to say that
      there are three students who use this stair, and are in the habit
      of passing your door?”

      “Yes, there are.”

      “And they are all in for this examination?”

      “Yes.”

      “Have you any reason to suspect any one of them more than the
      others?”

      Soames hesitated.

      “It is a very delicate question,” said he. “One hardly likes to
      throw suspicion where there are no proofs.”

      “Let us hear the suspicions. I will look after the proofs.”

      “I will tell you, then, in a few words the character of the three
      men who inhabit these rooms. The lower of the three is Gilchrist,
      a fine scholar and athlete, plays in the Rugby team and the
      cricket team for the college, and got his Blue for the hurdles
      and the long jump. He is a fine, manly fellow. His father was the
      notorious Sir Jabez Gilchrist, who ruined himself on the turf. My
      scholar has been left very poor, but he is hard-working and
      industrious. He will do well.

      “The second floor is inhabited by Daulat Ras, the Indian. He is a
      quiet, inscrutable fellow; as most of those Indians are. He is
      well up in his work, though his Greek is his weak subject. He is
      steady and methodical.

      “The top floor belongs to Miles McLaren. He is a brilliant fellow
      when he chooses to work—one of the brightest intellects of the
      university; but he is wayward, dissipated, and unprincipled. He
      was nearly expelled over a card scandal in his first year. He has
      been idling all this term, and he must look forward with dread to
      the examination.”

      “Then it is he whom you suspect?”

      “I dare not go so far as that. But, of the three, he is perhaps
      the least unlikely.”

      “Exactly. Now, Mr. Soames, let us have a look at your servant,
      Bannister.”

      He was a little, white-faced, clean-shaven, grizzly-haired fellow
      of fifty. He was still suffering from this sudden disturbance of
      the quiet routine of his life. His plump face was twitching with
      his nervousness, and his fingers could not keep still.

      “We are investigating this unhappy business, Bannister,” said his
      master.

      “Yes, sir.”

      “I understand,” said Holmes, “that you left your key in the
      door?”

      “Yes, sir.”

      “Was it not very extraordinary that you should do this on the
      very day when there were these papers inside?”

      “It was most unfortunate, sir. But I have occasionally done the
      same thing at other times.”

      “When did you enter the room?”

      “It was about half-past four. That is Mr. Soames’ tea time.”

      “How long did you stay?”

      “When I saw that he was absent, I withdrew at once.”

      “Did you look at these papers on the table?”

      “No, sir—certainly not.”

      “How came you to leave the key in the door?”

      “I had the tea-tray in my hand. I thought I would come back for
      the key. Then I forgot.”

      “Has the outer door a spring lock?”

      “No, sir.”

      “Then it was open all the time?”

      “Yes, sir.”

      “Anyone in the room could get out?”

      “Yes, sir.”

      “When Mr. Soames returned and called for you, you were very much
      disturbed?”

      “Yes, sir. Such a thing has never happened during the many years
      that I have been here. I nearly fainted, sir.”

      “So I understand. Where were you when you began to feel bad?”

      “Where was I, sir? Why, here, near the door.”

      “That is singular, because you sat down in that chair over yonder
      near the corner. Why did you pass these other chairs?”

      “I don’t know, sir, it didn’t matter to me where I sat.”

      “I really don’t think he knew much about it, Mr. Holmes. He was
      looking very bad—quite ghastly.”

      “You stayed here when your master left?”

      “Only for a minute or so. Then I locked the door and went to my
      room.”

      “Whom do you suspect?”

      “Oh, I would not venture to say, sir. I don’t believe there is
      any gentleman in this university who is capable of profiting by
      such an action. No, sir, I’ll not believe it.”

      “Thank you, that will do,” said Holmes. “Oh, one more word. You
      have not mentioned to any of the three gentlemen whom you attend
      that anything is amiss?”

      “No, sir—not a word.”

      “You haven’t seen any of them?”

      “No, sir.”

      “Very good. Now, Mr. Soames, we will take a walk in the
      quadrangle, if you please.”

      Three yellow squares of light shone above us in the gathering
      gloom.

      “Your three birds are all in their nests,” said Holmes, looking
      up. “Halloa! What’s that? One of them seems restless enough.”

      It was the Indian, whose dark silhouette appeared suddenly upon
      his blind. He was pacing swiftly up and down his room.

      “I should like to have a peep at each of them,” said Holmes. “Is
      it possible?”

      “No difficulty in the world,” Soames answered. “This set of rooms
      is quite the oldest in the college, and it is not unusual for
      visitors to go over them. Come along, and I will personally
      conduct you.”

      “No names, please!” said Holmes, as we knocked at Gilchrist’s
      door. A tall, flaxen-haired, slim young fellow opened it, and
      made us welcome when he understood our errand. There were some
      really curious pieces of mediæval domestic architecture within.
      Holmes was so charmed with one of them that he insisted on
      drawing it in his notebook, broke his pencil, had to borrow one
      from our host and finally borrowed a knife to sharpen his own.
      The same curious accident happened to him in the rooms of the
      Indian—a silent, little, hook-nosed fellow, who eyed us askance,
      and was obviously glad when Holmes’s architectural studies had
      come to an end. I could not see that in either case Holmes had
      come upon the clue for which he was searching. Only at the third
      did our visit prove abortive. The outer door would not open to
      our knock, and nothing more substantial than a torrent of bad
      language came from behind it. “I don’t care who you are. You can
      go to blazes!” roared the angry voice. “Tomorrow’s the exam, and
      I won’t be drawn by anyone.”

      “A rude fellow,” said our guide, flushing with anger as we
      withdrew down the stair. “Of course, he did not realize that it
      was I who was knocking, but none the less his conduct was very
      uncourteous, and, indeed, under the circumstances rather
      suspicious.”

      Holmes’s response was a curious one.

      “Can you tell me his exact height?” he asked.

      “Really, Mr. Holmes, I cannot undertake to say. He is taller than
      the Indian, not so tall as Gilchrist. I suppose five foot six
      would be about it.”

      “That is very important,” said Holmes. “And now, Mr. Soames, I
      wish you good-night.”

      Our guide cried aloud in his astonishment and dismay. “Good
      gracious, Mr. Holmes, you are surely not going to leave me in
      this abrupt fashion! You don’t seem to realize the position.
      To-morrow is the examination. I must take some definite action
      to-night. I cannot allow the examination to be held if one of the
      papers has been tampered with. The situation must be faced.”

      “You must leave it as it is. I shall drop round early to-morrow
      morning and chat the matter over. It is possible that I may be in
      a position then to indicate some course of action. Meanwhile, you
      change nothing—nothing at all.”

      “Very good, Mr. Holmes.”

      “You can be perfectly easy in your mind. We shall certainly find
      some way out of your difficulties. I will take the black clay
      with me, also the pencil cuttings. Good-bye.”

      When we were out in the darkness of the quadrangle, we again
      looked up at the windows. The Indian still paced his room. The
      others were invisible.

      “Well, Watson, what do you think of it?” Holmes asked, as we came
      out into the main street. “Quite a little parlour game—sort of
      three-card trick, is it not? There are your three men. It must be
      one of them. You take your choice. Which is yours?”

      “The foul-mouthed fellow at the top. He is the one with the worst
      record. And yet that Indian was a sly fellow also. Why should he
      be pacing his room all the time?”

      “There is nothing in that. Many men do it when they are trying to
      learn anything by heart.”

      “He looked at us in a queer way.”

      “So would you, if a flock of strangers came in on you when you
      were preparing for an examination next day, and every moment was
      of value. No, I see nothing in that. Pencils, too, and knives—all
      was satisfactory. But that fellow _does_ puzzle me.”

      “Who?”

      “Why, Bannister, the servant. What’s his game in the matter?”

      “He impressed me as being a perfectly honest man.”

      “So he did me. That’s the puzzling part. Why should a perfectly
      honest man—well, well, here’s a large stationer’s. We shall begin
      our researches here.”

      There were only four stationers of any consequences in the town,
      and at each Holmes produced his pencil chips, and bid high for a
      duplicate. All were agreed that one could be ordered, but that it
      was not a usual size of pencil and that it was seldom kept in
      stock. My friend did not appear to be depressed by his failure,
      but shrugged his shoulders in half-humorous resignation.

      “No good, my dear Watson. This, the best and only final clue, has
      run to nothing. But, indeed, I have little doubt that we can
      build up a sufficient case without it. By Jove! my dear fellow,
      it is nearly nine, and the landlady babbled of green peas at
      seven-thirty. What with your eternal tobacco, Watson, and your
      irregularity at meals, I expect that you will get notice to quit,
      and that I shall share your downfall—not, however, before we have
      solved the problem of the nervous tutor, the careless servant,
      and the three enterprising students.”

      Holmes made no further allusion to the matter that day, though he
      sat lost in thought for a long time after our belated dinner. At
      eight in the morning, he came into my room just as I finished my
      toilet.

      “Well, Watson,” said he, “it is time we went down to St. Luke’s.
      Can you do without breakfast?”

      “Certainly.”

      “Soames will be in a dreadful fidget until we are able to tell
      him something positive.”

      “Have you anything positive to tell him?”

      “I think so.”

      “You have formed a conclusion?”

      “Yes, my dear Watson, I have solved the mystery.”

      “But what fresh evidence could you have got?”

      “Aha! It is not for nothing that I have turned myself out of bed
      at the untimely hour of six. I have put in two hours’ hard work
      and covered at least five miles, with something to show for it.
      Look at that!”

      He held out his hand. On the palm were three little pyramids of
      black, doughy clay.

      “Why, Holmes, you had only two yesterday.”

      “And one more this morning. It is a fair argument that wherever
      No. 3 came from is also the source of Nos. 1 and 2. Eh, Watson?
      Well, come along and put friend Soames out of his pain.”

      The unfortunate tutor was certainly in a state of pitiable
      agitation when we found him in his chambers. In a few hours the
      examination would commence, and he was still in the dilemma
      between making the facts public and allowing the culprit to
      compete for the valuable scholarship. He could hardly stand still
      so great was his mental agitation, and he ran towards Holmes with
      two eager hands outstretched.

      “Thank heaven that you have come! I feared that you had given it
      up in despair. What am I to do? Shall the examination proceed?”

      “Yes, let it proceed, by all means.”

      “But this rascal--?”

      “He shall not compete.”

      “You know him?”

      “I think so. If this matter is not to become public, we must give
      ourselves certain powers and resolve ourselves into a small
      private court-martial. You there, if you please, Soames! Watson,
      you here! I’ll take the armchair in the middle. I think that we
      are now sufficiently imposing to strike terror into a guilty
      breast. Kindly ring the bell!”

      Bannister entered, and shrank back in evident surprise and fear
      at our judicial appearance.

      “You will kindly close the door,” said Holmes. “Now, Bannister,
      will you please tell us the truth about yesterday’s incident?”

      The man turned white to the roots of his hair.

      “I have told you everything, sir.”

      “Nothing to add?”

      “Nothing at all, sir.”

      “Well, then, I must make some suggestions to you. When you sat
      down on that chair yesterday, did you do so in order to conceal
      some object which would have shown who had been in the room?”

      Bannister’s face was ghastly.

      “No, sir, certainly not.”

      “It is only a suggestion,” said Holmes, suavely. “I frankly admit
      that I am unable to prove it. But it seems probable enough, since
      the moment that Mr. Soames’s back was turned, you released the
      man who was hiding in that bedroom.”

      Bannister licked his dry lips.

      “There was no man, sir.”

      “Ah, that’s a pity, Bannister. Up to now you may have spoken the
      truth, but now I know that you have lied.”

      The man’s face set in sullen defiance.

      “There was no man, sir.”

      “Come, come, Bannister!”

      “No, sir, there was no one.”

      “In that case, you can give us no further information. Would you
      please remain in the room? Stand over there near the bedroom
      door. Now, Soames, I am going to ask you to have the great
      kindness to go up to the room of young Gilchrist, and to ask him
      to step down into yours.”

      An instant later the tutor returned, bringing with him the
      student. He was a fine figure of a man, tall, lithe, and agile,
      with a springy step and a pleasant, open face. His troubled blue
      eyes glanced at each of us, and finally rested with an expression
      of blank dismay upon Bannister in the farther corner.

      “Just close the door,” said Holmes. “Now, Mr. Gilchrist, we are
      all quite alone here, and no one need ever know one word of what
      passes between us. We can be perfectly frank with each other. We
      want to know, Mr. Gilchrist, how you, an honourable man, ever
      came to commit such an action as that of yesterday?”

      The unfortunate young man staggered back, and cast a look full of
      horror and reproach at Bannister.

      “No, no, Mr. Gilchrist, sir, I never said a word—never one word!”
      cried the servant.

      “No, but you have now,” said Holmes. “Now, sir, you must see that
      after Bannister’s words your position is hopeless, and that your
      only chance lies in a frank confession.”

      For a moment Gilchrist, with upraised hand, tried to control his
      writhing features. The next he had thrown himself on his knees
      beside the table, and burying his face in his hands, he had burst
      into a storm of passionate sobbing.

      “Come, come,” said Holmes, kindly, “it is human to err, and at
      least no one can accuse you of being a callous criminal. Perhaps
      it would be easier for you if I were to tell Mr. Soames what
      occurred, and you can check me where I am wrong. Shall I do so?
      Well, well, don’t trouble to answer. Listen, and see that I do
      you no injustice.

      “From the moment, Mr. Soames, that you said to me that no one,
      not even Bannister, could have told that the papers were in your
      room, the case began to take a definite shape in my mind. The
      printer one could, of course, dismiss. He could examine the
      papers in his own office. The Indian I also thought nothing of.
      If the proofs were in a roll, he could not possibly know what
      they were. On the other hand, it seemed an unthinkable
      coincidence that a man should dare to enter the room, and that by
      chance on that very day the papers were on the table. I dismissed
      that. The man who entered knew that the papers were there. How
      did he know?

      “When I approached your room, I examined the window. You amused
      me by supposing that I was contemplating the possibility of
      someone having in broad daylight, under the eyes of all these
      opposite rooms, forced himself through it. Such an idea was
      absurd. I was measuring how tall a man would need to be in order
      to see, as he passed, what papers were on the central table. I am
      six feet high, and I could do it with an effort. No one less than
      that would have a chance. Already you see I had reason to think
      that, if one of your three students was a man of unusual height,
      he was the most worth watching of the three.

      “I entered, and I took you into my confidence as to the
      suggestions of the side table. Of the centre table I could make
      nothing, until in your description of Gilchrist you mentioned
      that he was a long-distance jumper. Then the whole thing came to
      me in an instant, and I only needed certain corroborative proofs,
      which I speedily obtained.

      “What happened was this. This young fellow had employed his
      afternoon at the athletic grounds, where he had been practising
      the jump. He returned carrying his jumping-shoes, which are
      provided, as you are aware, with several sharp spikes. As he
      passed your window he saw, by means of his great height, these
      proofs upon your table, and conjectured what they were. No harm
      would have been done had it not been that, as he passed your
      door, he perceived the key which had been left by the
      carelessness of your servant. A sudden impulse came over him to
      enter, and see if they were indeed the proofs. It was not a
      dangerous exploit for he could always pretend that he had simply
      looked in to ask a question.

      “Well, when he saw that they were indeed the proofs, it was then
      that he yielded to temptation. He put his shoes on the table.
      What was it you put on that chair near the window?”

      “Gloves,” said the young man.

      Holmes looked triumphantly at Bannister. “He put his gloves on
      the chair, and he took the proofs, sheet by sheet, to copy them.
      He thought the tutor must return by the main gate and that he
      would see him. As we know, he came back by the side gate.
      Suddenly he heard him at the very door. There was no possible
      escape. He forgot his gloves but he caught up his shoes and
      darted into the bedroom. You observe that the scratch on that
      table is slight at one side, but deepens in the direction of the
      bedroom door. That in itself is enough to show us that the shoe
      had been drawn in that direction, and that the culprit had taken
      refuge there. The earth round the spike had been left on the
      table, and a second sample was loosened and fell in the bedroom.
      I may add that I walked out to the athletic grounds this morning,
      saw that tenacious black clay is used in the jumping-pit and
      carried away a specimen of it, together with some of the fine tan
      or sawdust which is strewn over it to prevent the athlete from
      slipping. Have I told the truth, Mr. Gilchrist?”

      The student had drawn himself erect.

      “Yes, sir, it is true,” said he.

      “Good heavens! have you nothing to add?” cried Soames.

      “Yes, sir, I have, but the shock of this disgraceful exposure has
      bewildered me. I have a letter here, Mr. Soames, which I wrote to
      you early this morning in the middle of a restless night. It was
      before I knew that my sin had found me out. Here it is, sir. You
      will see that I have said, ‘I have determined not to go in for
      the examination. I have been offered a commission in the
      Rhodesian Police, and I am going out to South Africa at once.’”

      “I am indeed pleased to hear that you did not intend to profit by
      your unfair advantage,” said Soames. “But why did you change your
      purpose?”

      Gilchrist pointed to Bannister.

      “There is the man who set me in the right path,” said he.

      “Come now, Bannister,” said Holmes. “It will be clear to you,
      from what I have said, that only you could have let this young
      man out, since you were left in the room, and must have locked
      the door when you went out. As to his escaping by that window, it
      was incredible. Can you not clear up the last point in this
      mystery, and tell us the reasons for your action?”

      “It was simple enough, sir, if you only had known, but, with all
      your cleverness, it was impossible that you could know. Time was,
      sir, when I was butler to old Sir Jabez Gilchrist, this young
      gentleman’s father. When he was ruined I came to the college as
      servant, but I never forgot my old employer because he was down
      in the world. I watched his son all I could for the sake of the
      old days. Well, sir, when I came into this room yesterday, when
      the alarm was given, the very first thing I saw was Mr.
      Gilchrist’s tan gloves a-lying in that chair. I knew those gloves
      well, and I understood their message. If Mr. Soames saw them, the
      game was up. I flopped down into that chair, and nothing would
      budge me until Mr. Soames he went for you. Then out came my poor
      young master, whom I had dandled on my knee, and confessed it all
      to me. Wasn’t it natural, sir, that I should save him, and wasn’t
      it natural also that I should try to speak to him as his dead
      father would have done, and make him understand that he could not
      profit by such a deed? Could you blame me, sir?”

      “No, indeed,” said Holmes, heartily, springing to his feet.
      “Well, Soames, I think we have cleared your little problem up,
      and our breakfast awaits us at home. Come, Watson! As to you,
      sir, I trust that a bright future awaits you in Rhodesia. For
      once you have fallen low. Let us see, in the future, how high you
      can rise.”




THE ADVENTURE OF THE GOLDEN PINCE-NEZ


      When I look at the three massive manuscript volumes which contain
      our work for the year 1894, I confess that it is very difficult
      for me, out of such a wealth of material, to select the cases
      which are most interesting in themselves, and at the same time
      most conducive to a display of those peculiar powers for which my
      friend was famous. As I turn over the pages, I see my notes upon
      the repulsive story of the red leech and the terrible death of
      Crosby, the banker. Here also I find an account of the Addleton
      tragedy, and the singular contents of the ancient British barrow.
      The famous Smith-Mortimer succession case comes also within this
      period, and so does the tracking and arrest of Huret, the
      Boulevard assassin—an exploit which won for Holmes an autograph
      letter of thanks from the French President and the Order of the
      Legion of Honour. Each of these would furnish a narrative, but on
      the whole I am of opinion that none of them unites so many
      singular points of interest as the episode of Yoxley Old Place,
      which includes not only the lamentable death of young Willoughby
      Smith, but also those subsequent developments which threw so
      curious a light upon the causes of the crime.

      It was a wild, tempestuous night, towards the close of November.
      Holmes and I sat together in silence all the evening, he engaged
      with a powerful lens deciphering the remains of the original
      inscription upon a palimpsest, I deep in a recent treatise upon
      surgery. Outside the wind howled down Baker Street, while the
      rain beat fiercely against the windows. It was strange there, in
      the very depths of the town, with ten miles of man’s handiwork on
      every side of us, to feel the iron grip of Nature, and to be
      conscious that to the huge elemental forces all London was no
      more than the molehills that dot the fields. I walked to the
      window, and looked out on the deserted street. The occasional
      lamps gleamed on the expanse of muddy road and shining pavement.
      A single cab was splashing its way from the Oxford Street end.

      “Well, Watson, it’s as well we have not to turn out to-night,”
      said Holmes, laying aside his lens and rolling up the palimpsest.
      “I’ve done enough for one sitting. It is trying work for the
      eyes. So far as I can make out, it is nothing more exciting than
      an Abbey’s accounts dating from the second half of the fifteenth
      century. Halloa! halloa! halloa! What’s this?”

      Amid the droning of the wind there had come the stamping of a
      horse’s hoofs, and the long grind of a wheel as it rasped against
      the curb. The cab which I had seen had pulled up at our door.

      “What can he want?” I ejaculated, as a man stepped out of it.

      “Want? He wants us. And we, my poor Watson, want overcoats and
      cravats and goloshes, and every aid that man ever invented to
      fight the weather. Wait a bit, though! There’s the cab off again!
      There’s hope yet. He’d have kept it if he had wanted us to come.
      Run down, my dear fellow, and open the door, for all virtuous
      folk have been long in bed.”

      When the light of the hall lamp fell upon our midnight visitor, I
      had no difficulty in recognizing him. It was young Stanley
      Hopkins, a promising detective, in whose career Holmes had
      several times shown a very practical interest.

      “Is he in?” he asked, eagerly.

      “Come up, my dear sir,” said Holmes’s voice from above. “I hope
      you have no designs upon us such a night as this.”

      The detective mounted the stairs, and our lamp gleamed upon his
      shining waterproof. I helped him out of it, while Holmes knocked
      a blaze out of the logs in the grate.

      “Now, my dear Hopkins, draw up and warm your toes,” said he.
      “Here’s a cigar, and the doctor has a prescription containing hot
      water and a lemon, which is good medicine on a night like this.
      It must be something important which has brought you out in such
      a gale.”

      “It is indeed, Mr. Holmes. I’ve had a bustling afternoon, I
      promise you. Did you see anything of the Yoxley case in the
      latest editions?”

      “I’ve seen nothing later than the fifteenth century to-day.”

      “Well, it was only a paragraph, and all wrong at that, so you
      have not missed anything. I haven’t let the grass grow under my
      feet. It’s down in Kent, seven miles from Chatham and three from
      the railway line. I was wired for at 3:15, reached Yoxley Old
      Place at 5, conducted my investigation, was back at Charing Cross
      by the last train, and straight to you by cab.”

      “Which means, I suppose, that you are not quite clear about your
      case?”

      “It means that I can make neither head nor tail of it. So far as
      I can see, it is just as tangled a business as ever I handled,
      and yet at first it seemed so simple that one couldn’t go wrong.
      There’s no motive, Mr. Holmes. That’s what bothers me—I can’t put
      my hand on a motive. Here’s a man dead—there’s no denying
      that—but, so far as I can see, no reason on earth why anyone
      should wish him harm.”

      Holmes lit his cigar and leaned back in his chair.

      “Let us hear about it,” said he.

      “I’ve got my facts pretty clear,” said Stanley Hopkins. “All I
      want now is to know what they all mean. The story, so far as I
      can make it out, is like this. Some years ago this country house,
      Yoxley Old Place, was taken by an elderly man, who gave the name
      of Professor Coram. He was an invalid, keeping his bed half the
      time, and the other half hobbling round the house with a stick or
      being pushed about the grounds by the gardener in a Bath chair.
      He was well liked by the few neighbours who called upon him, and
      he has the reputation down there of being a very learned man. His
      household used to consist of an elderly housekeeper, Mrs. Marker,
      and of a maid, Susan Tarlton. These have both been with him since
      his arrival, and they seem to be women of excellent character.
      The professor is writing a learned book, and he found it
      necessary, about a year ago, to engage a secretary. The first two
      that he tried were not successes, but the third, Mr. Willoughby
      Smith, a very young man straight from the university, seems to
      have been just what his employer wanted. His work consisted in
      writing all the morning to the professor’s dictation, and he
      usually spent the evening in hunting up references and passages
      which bore upon the next day’s work. This Willoughby Smith has
      nothing against him, either as a boy at Uppingham or as a young
      man at Cambridge. I have seen his testimonials, and from the
      first he was a decent, quiet, hard-working fellow, with no weak
      spot in him at all. And yet this is the lad who has met his death
      this morning in the professor’s study under circumstances which
      can point only to murder.”

      The wind howled and screamed at the windows. Holmes and I drew
      closer to the fire, while the young inspector slowly and point by
      point developed his singular narrative.

      “If you were to search all England,” said he, “I don’t suppose
      you could find a household more self-contained or freer from
      outside influences. Whole weeks would pass, and not one of them
      go past the garden gate. The professor was buried in his work and
      existed for nothing else. Young Smith knew nobody in the
      neighbourhood, and lived very much as his employer did. The two
      women had nothing to take them from the house. Mortimer, the
      gardener, who wheels the Bath chair, is an army pensioner—an old
      Crimean man of excellent character. He does not live in the
      house, but in a three-roomed cottage at the other end of the
      garden. Those are the only people that you would find within the
      grounds of Yoxley Old Place. At the same time, the gate of the
      garden is a hundred yards from the main London to Chatham road.
      It opens with a latch, and there is nothing to prevent anyone
      from walking in.

      “Now I will give you the evidence of Susan Tarlton, who is the
      only person who can say anything positive about the matter. It
      was in the forenoon, between eleven and twelve. She was engaged
      at the moment in hanging some curtains in the upstairs front
      bedroom. Professor Coram was still in bed, for when the weather
      is bad he seldom rises before midday. The housekeeper was busied
      with some work in the back of the house. Willoughby Smith had
      been in his bedroom, which he uses as a sitting-room, but the
      maid heard him at that moment pass along the passage and descend
      to the study immediately below her. She did not see him, but she
      says that she could not be mistaken in his quick, firm tread. She
      did not hear the study door close, but a minute or so later there
      was a dreadful cry in the room below. It was a wild, hoarse
      scream, so strange and unnatural that it might have come either
      from a man or a woman. At the same instant there was a heavy
      thud, which shook the old house, and then all was silence. The
      maid stood petrified for a moment, and then, recovering her
      courage, she ran downstairs. The study door was shut and she
      opened it. Inside, young Mr. Willoughby Smith was stretched upon
      the floor. At first she could see no injury, but as she tried to
      raise him she saw that blood was pouring from the underside of
      his neck. It was pierced by a very small but very deep wound,
      which had divided the carotid artery. The instrument with which
      the injury had been inflicted lay upon the carpet beside him. It
      was one of those small sealing-wax knives to be found on
      old-fashioned writing-tables, with an ivory handle and a stiff
      blade. It was part of the fittings of the professor’s own desk.

      “At first the maid thought that young Smith was already dead, but
      on pouring some water from the carafe over his forehead he opened
      his eyes for an instant. ‘The professor,’ he murmured—‘it was
      she.’ The maid is prepared to swear that those were the exact
      words. He tried desperately to say something else, and he held
      his right hand up in the air. Then he fell back dead.

      “In the meantime the housekeeper had also arrived upon the scene,
      but she was just too late to catch the young man’s dying words.
      Leaving Susan with the body, she hurried to the professor’s room.
      He was sitting up in bed, horribly agitated, for he had heard
      enough to convince him that something terrible had occurred. Mrs.
      Marker is prepared to swear that the professor was still in his
      night-clothes, and indeed it was impossible for him to dress
      without the help of Mortimer, whose orders were to come at twelve
      o’clock. The professor declares that he heard the distant cry,
      but that he knows nothing more. He can give no explanation of the
      young man’s last words, ‘The professor—it was she,’ but imagines
      that they were the outcome of delirium. He believes that
      Willoughby Smith had not an enemy in the world, and can give no
      reason for the crime. His first action was to send Mortimer, the
      gardener, for the local police. A little later the chief
      constable sent for me. Nothing was moved before I got there, and
      strict orders were given that no one should walk upon the paths
      leading to the house. It was a splendid chance of putting your
      theories into practice, Mr. Sherlock Holmes. There was really
      nothing wanting.”

      “Except Mr. Sherlock Holmes,” said my companion, with a somewhat
      bitter smile. “Well, let us hear about it. What sort of a job did
      you make of it?”

      “I must ask you first, Mr. Holmes, to glance at this rough plan,
      which will give you a general idea of the position of the
      professor’s study and the various points of the case. It will
      help you in following my investigation.”

      He unfolded the rough chart, which I here reproduce, and he laid
      it across Holmes’s knee. I rose and, standing behind Holmes,
      studied it over his shoulder.

      Professor's-Study

      “It is very rough, of course, and it only deals with the points
      which seem to me to be essential. All the rest you will see later
      for yourself. Now, first of all, presuming that the assassin
      entered the house, how did he or she come in? Undoubtedly by the
      garden path and the back door, from which there is direct access
      to the study. Any other way would have been exceedingly
      complicated. The escape must have also been made along that line,
      for of the two other exits from the room one was blocked by Susan
      as she ran downstairs and the other leads straight to the
      professor’s bedroom. I therefore directed my attention at once to
      the garden path, which was saturated with recent rain, and would
      certainly show any footmarks.

      “My examination showed me that I was dealing with a cautious and
      expert criminal. No footmarks were to be found on the path. There
      could be no question, however, that someone had passed along the
      grass border which lines the path, and that he had done so in
      order to avoid leaving a track. I could not find anything in the
      nature of a distinct impression, but the grass was trodden down,
      and someone had undoubtedly passed. It could only have been the
      murderer, since neither the gardener nor anyone else had been
      there that morning, and the rain had only begun during the
      night.”

      “One moment,” said Holmes. “Where does this path lead to?”

      “To the road.”

      “How long is it?”

      “A hundred yards or so.”

      “At the point where the path passes through the gate, you could
      surely pick up the tracks?”

      “Unfortunately, the path was tiled at that point.”

      “Well, on the road itself?”

      “No, it was all trodden into mire.”

      “Tut-tut! Well, then, these tracks upon the grass, were they
      coming or going?”

      “It was impossible to say. There was never any outline.”

      “A large foot or a small?”

      “You could not distinguish.”

      Holmes gave an ejaculation of impatience.

      “It has been pouring rain and blowing a hurricane ever since,”
      said he. “It will be harder to read now than that palimpsest.
      Well, well, it can’t be helped. What did you do, Hopkins, after
      you had made certain that you had made certain of nothing?”

      “I think I made certain of a good deal, Mr. Holmes. I knew that
      someone had entered the house cautiously from without. I next
      examined the corridor. It is lined with cocoanut matting and had
      taken no impression of any kind. This brought me into the study
      itself. It is a scantily furnished room. The main article is a
      large writing-table with a fixed bureau. This bureau consists of
      a double column of drawers, with a central small cupboard between
      them. The drawers were open, the cupboard locked. The drawers, it
      seems, were always open, and nothing of value was kept in them.
      There were some papers of importance in the cupboard, but there
      were no signs that this had been tampered with, and the professor
      assures me that nothing was missing. It is certain that no
      robbery has been committed.

      “I come now to the body of the young man. It was found near the
      bureau, and just to the left of it, as marked upon that chart.
      The stab was on the right side of the neck and from behind
      forward, so that it is almost impossible that it could have been
      self-inflicted.”

      “Unless he fell upon the knife,” said Holmes.

      “Exactly. The idea crossed my mind. But we found the knife some
      feet away from the body, so that seems impossible. Then, of
      course, there are the man’s own dying words. And, finally, there
      was this very important piece of evidence which was found clasped
      in the dead man’s right hand.”

      From his pocket Stanley Hopkins drew a small paper packet. He
      unfolded it and disclosed a golden pince-nez, with two broken
      ends of black silk cord dangling from the end of it. “Willoughby
      Smith had excellent sight,” he added. “There can be no question
      that this was snatched from the face or the person of the
      assassin.”

      Sherlock Holmes took the glasses into his hand, and examined them
      with the utmost attention and interest. He held them on his nose,
      endeavoured to read through them, went to the window and stared
      up the street with them, looked at them most minutely in the full
      light of the lamp, and finally, with a chuckle, seated himself at
      the table and wrote a few lines upon a sheet of paper, which he
      tossed across to Stanley Hopkins.

      “That’s the best I can do for you,” said he. “It may prove to be
      of some use.”

      The astonished detective read the note aloud. It ran as follows:

      “Wanted, a woman of good address, attired like a lady. She has a
      remarkably thick nose, with eyes which are set close upon either
      side of it. She has a puckered forehead, a peering expression,
      and probably rounded shoulders. There are indications that she
      has had recourse to an optician at least twice during the last
      few months. As her glasses are of remarkable strength, and as
      opticians are not very numerous, there should be no difficulty in
      tracing her.”

      Holmes smiled at the astonishment of Hopkins, which must have
      been reflected upon my features. “Surely my deductions are
      simplicity itself,” said he. “It would be difficult to name any
      articles which afford a finer field for inference than a pair of
      glasses, especially so remarkable a pair as these. That they
      belong to a woman I infer from their delicacy, and also, of
      course, from the last words of the dying man. As to her being a
      person of refinement and well dressed, they are, as you perceive,
      handsomely mounted in solid gold, and it is inconceivable that
      anyone who wore such glasses could be slatternly in other
      respects. You will find that the clips are too wide for your
      nose, showing that the lady’s nose was very broad at the base.
      This sort of nose is usually a short and coarse one, but there is
      a sufficient number of exceptions to prevent me from being
      dogmatic or from insisting upon this point in my description. My
      own face is a narrow one, and yet I find that I cannot get my
      eyes into the centre, nor near the centre, of these glasses.
      Therefore, the lady’s eyes are set very near to the sides of the
      nose. You will perceive, Watson, that the glasses are concave and
      of unusual strength. A lady whose vision has been so extremely
      contracted all her life is sure to have the physical
      characteristics of such vision, which are seen in the forehead,
      the eyelids, and the shoulders.”

      “Yes,” I said, “I can follow each of your arguments. I confess,
      however, that I am unable to understand how you arrive at the
      double visit to the optician.”

      Holmes took the glasses in his hand.

      “You will perceive,” he said, “that the clips are lined with tiny
      bands of cork to soften the pressure upon the nose. One of these
      is discoloured and worn to some slight extent, but the other is
      new. Evidently one has fallen off and been replaced. I should
      judge that the older of them has not been there more than a few
      months. They exactly correspond, so I gather that the lady went
      back to the same establishment for the second.”

      “By George, it’s marvellous!” cried Hopkins, in an ecstasy of
      admiration. “To think that I had all that evidence in my hand and
      never knew it! I had intended, however, to go the round of the
      London opticians.”

      “Of course you would. Meanwhile, have you anything more to tell
      us about the case?”

      “Nothing, Mr. Holmes. I think that you know as much as I do
      now—probably more. We have had inquiries made as to any stranger
      seen on the country roads or at the railway station. We have
      heard of none. What beats me is the utter want of all object in
      the crime. Not a ghost of a motive can anyone suggest.”

      “Ah! there I am not in a position to help you. But I suppose you
      want us to come out to-morrow?”

      “If it is not asking too much, Mr. Holmes. There’s a train from
      Charing Cross to Chatham at six in the morning, and we should be
      at Yoxley Old Place between eight and nine.”

      “Then we shall take it. Your case has certainly some features of
      great interest, and I shall be delighted to look into it. Well,
      it’s nearly one, and we had best get a few hours’ sleep. I
      daresay you can manage all right on the sofa in front of the
      fire. I’ll light my spirit lamp, and give you a cup of coffee
      before we start.”

      The gale had blown itself out next day, but it was a bitter
      morning when we started upon our journey. We saw the cold winter
      sun rise over the dreary marshes of the Thames and the long,
      sullen reaches of the river, which I shall ever associate with
      our pursuit of the Andaman Islander in the earlier days of our
      career. After a long and weary journey, we alighted at a small
      station some miles from Chatham. While a horse was being put into
      a trap at the local inn, we snatched a hurried breakfast, and so
      we were all ready for business when we at last arrived at Yoxley
      Old Place. A constable met us at the garden gate.

      “Well, Wilson, any news?”

      “No, sir—nothing.”

      “No reports of any stranger seen?”

      “No, sir. Down at the station they are certain that no stranger
      either came or went yesterday.”

      “Have you had inquiries made at inns and lodgings?”

      “Yes, sir: there is no one that we cannot account for.”

      “Well, it’s only a reasonable walk to Chatham. Anyone might stay
      there or take a train without being observed. This is the garden
      path of which I spoke, Mr. Holmes. I’ll pledge my word there was
      no mark on it yesterday.”

      “On which side were the marks on the grass?”

      “This side, sir. This narrow margin of grass between the path and
      the flower-bed. I can’t see the traces now, but they were clear
      to me then.”

      “Yes, yes: someone has passed along,” said Holmes, stooping over
      the grass border. “Our lady must have picked her steps carefully,
      must she not, since on the one side she would leave a track on
      the path, and on the other an even clearer one on the soft bed?”

      “Yes, sir, she must have been a cool hand.”

      I saw an intent look pass over Holmes’s face.

      “You say that she must have come back this way?”

      “Yes, sir, there is no other.”

      “On this strip of grass?”

      “Certainly, Mr. Holmes.”

      “Hum! It was a very remarkable performance—very remarkable. Well,
      I think we have exhausted the path. Let us go farther. This
      garden door is usually kept open, I suppose? Then this visitor
      had nothing to do but to walk in. The idea of murder was not in
      her mind, or she would have provided herself with some sort of
      weapon, instead of having to pick this knife off the
      writing-table. She advanced along this corridor, leaving no
      traces upon the cocoanut matting. Then she found herself in this
      study. How long was she there? We have no means of judging.”

      “Not more than a few minutes, sir. I forgot to tell you that Mrs.
      Marker, the housekeeper, had been in there tidying not very long
      before—about a quarter of an hour, she says.”

      “Well, that gives us a limit. Our lady enters this room, and what
      does she do? She goes over to the writing-table. What for? Not
      for anything in the drawers. If there had been anything worth her
      taking, it would surely have been locked up. No, it was for
      something in that wooden bureau. Halloa! what is that scratch
      upon the face of it? Just hold a match, Watson. Why did you not
      tell me of this, Hopkins?”

      The mark which he was examining began upon the brass-work on the
      right-hand side of the keyhole, and extended for about four
      inches, where it had scratched the varnish from the surface.

      “I noticed it, Mr. Holmes, but you’ll always find scratches round
      a keyhole.”

      “This is recent, quite recent. See how the brass shines where it
      is cut. An old scratch would be the same colour as the surface.
      Look at it through my lens. There’s the varnish, too, like earth
      on each side of a furrow. Is Mrs. Marker there?”

      A sad-faced, elderly woman came into the room.

      “Did you dust this bureau yesterday morning?”

      “Yes, sir.”

      “Did you notice this scratch?”

      “No, sir, I did not.”

      “I am sure you did not, for a duster would have swept away these
      shreds of varnish. Who has the key of this bureau?”

      “The Professor keeps it on his watch-chain.”

      “Is it a simple key?”

      “No, sir, it is a Chubb’s key.”

      “Very good. Mrs. Marker, you can go. Now we are making a little
      progress. Our lady enters the room, advances to the bureau, and
      either opens it or tries to do so. While she is thus engaged,
      young Willoughby Smith enters the room. In her hurry to withdraw
      the key, she makes this scratch upon the door. He seizes her, and
      she, snatching up the nearest object, which happens to be this
      knife, strikes at him in order to make him let go his hold. The
      blow is a fatal one. He falls and she escapes, either with or
      without the object for which she has come. Is Susan, the maid,
      there? Could anyone have got away through that door after the
      time that you heard the cry, Susan?”

      “No, sir, it is impossible. Before I got down the stair, I’d have
      seen anyone in the passage. Besides, the door never opened, or I
      would have heard it.”

      “That settles this exit. Then no doubt the lady went out the way
      she came. I understand that this other passage leads only to the
      professor’s room. There is no exit that way?”

      “No, sir.”

      “We shall go down it and make the acquaintance of the professor.
      Halloa, Hopkins! this is very important, very important indeed.
      The professor’s corridor is also lined with cocoanut matting.”

      “Well, sir, what of that?”

      “Don’t you see any bearing upon the case? Well, well. I don’t
      insist upon it. No doubt I am wrong. And yet it seems to me to be
      suggestive. Come with me and introduce me.”

      We passed down the passage, which was of the same length as that
      which led to the garden. At the end was a short flight of steps
      ending in a door. Our guide knocked, and then ushered us into the
      professor’s bedroom.

      It was a very large chamber, lined with innumerable volumes,
      which had overflowed from the shelves and lay in piles in the
      corners, or were stacked all round at the base of the cases. The
      bed was in the centre of the room, and in it, propped up with
      pillows, was the owner of the house. I have seldom seen a more
      remarkable-looking person. It was a gaunt, aquiline face which
      was turned towards us, with piercing dark eyes, which lurked in
      deep hollows under overhung and tufted brows. His hair and beard
      were white, save that the latter was curiously stained with
      yellow around his mouth. A cigarette glowed amid the tangle of
      white hair, and the air of the room was fetid with stale tobacco
      smoke. As he held out his hand to Holmes, I perceived that it was
      also stained with yellow nicotine.

      “A smoker, Mr. Holmes?” said he, speaking in well-chosen English,
      with a curious little mincing accent. “Pray take a cigarette. And
      you, sir? I can recommend them, for I have them especially
      prepared by Ionides, of Alexandria. He sends me a thousand at a
      time, and I grieve to say that I have to arrange for a fresh
      supply every fortnight. Bad, sir, very bad, but an old man has
      few pleasures. Tobacco and my work—that is all that is left to
      me.”

      Holmes had lit a cigarette and was shooting little darting
      glances all over the room.

      “Tobacco and my work, but now only tobacco,” the old man
      exclaimed. “Alas! what a fatal interruption! Who could have
      foreseen such a terrible catastrophe? So estimable a young man! I
      assure you that, after a few months’ training, he was an
      admirable assistant. What do you think of the matter, Mr.
      Holmes?”

      “I have not yet made up my mind.”

      “I shall indeed be indebted to you if you can throw a light where
      all is so dark to us. To a poor bookworm and invalid like myself
      such a blow is paralysing. I seem to have lost the faculty of
      thought. But you are a man of action—you are a man of affairs. It
      is part of the everyday routine of your life. You can preserve
      your balance in every emergency. We are fortunate, indeed, in
      having you at our side.”

      Holmes was pacing up and down one side of the room whilst the old
      professor was talking. I observed that he was smoking with
      extraordinary rapidity. It was evident that he shared our host’s
      liking for the fresh Alexandrian cigarettes.

      “Yes, sir, it is a crushing blow,” said the old man. “That is my
      _magnum opus_—the pile of papers on the side table yonder. It is
      my analysis of the documents found in the Coptic monasteries of
      Syria and Egypt, a work which will cut deep at the very
      foundation of revealed religion. With my enfeebled health I do
      not know whether I shall ever be able to complete it, now that my
      assistant has been taken from me. Dear me! Mr. Holmes, why, you
      are even a quicker smoker than I am myself.”

      Holmes smiled.

      “I am a connoisseur,” said he, taking another cigarette from the
      box—his fourth—and lighting it from the stub of that which he had
      finished. “I will not trouble you with any lengthy
      cross-examination, Professor Coram, since I gather that you were
      in bed at the time of the crime, and could know nothing about it.
      I would only ask this: What do you imagine that this poor fellow
      meant by his last words: ‘The professor—it was she’?”

      The professor shook his head.

      “Susan is a country girl,” said he, “and you know the incredible
      stupidity of that class. I fancy that the poor fellow murmured
      some incoherent delirious words, and that she twisted them into
      this meaningless message.”

      “I see. You have no explanation yourself of the tragedy?”

      “Possibly an accident, possibly—I only breathe it among
      ourselves—a suicide. Young men have their hidden troubles—some
      affair of the heart, perhaps, which we have never known. It is a
      more probable supposition than murder.”

      “But the eyeglasses?”

      “Ah! I am only a student—a man of dreams. I cannot explain the
      practical things of life. But still, we are aware, my friend,
      that love-gages may take strange shapes. By all means take
      another cigarette. It is a pleasure to see anyone appreciate them
      so. A fan, a glove, glasses—who knows what article may be carried
      as a token or treasured when a man puts an end to his life? This
      gentleman speaks of footsteps in the grass, but, after all, it is
      easy to be mistaken on such a point. As to the knife, it might
      well be thrown far from the unfortunate man as he fell. It is
      possible that I speak as a child, but to me it seems that
      Willoughby Smith has met his fate by his own hand.”

      Holmes seemed struck by the theory thus put forward, and he
      continued to walk up and down for some time, lost in thought and
      consuming cigarette after cigarette.

      “Tell me, Professor Coram,” he said, at last, “what is in that
      cupboard in the bureau?”

      “Nothing that would help a thief. Family papers, letters from my
      poor wife, diplomas of universities which have done me honour.
      Here is the key. You can look for yourself.”

      Holmes picked up the key, and looked at it for an instant, then
      he handed it back.

      “No, I hardly think that it would help me,” said he. “I should
      prefer to go quietly down to your garden, and turn the whole
      matter over in my head. There is something to be said for the
      theory of suicide which you have put forward. We must apologize
      for having intruded upon you, Professor Coram, and I promise that
      we won’t disturb you until after lunch. At two o’clock we will
      come again, and report to you anything which may have happened in
      the interval.”

      Holmes was curiously distrait, and we walked up and down the
      garden path for some time in silence.

      “Have you a clue?” I asked, at last.

      “It depends upon those cigarettes that I smoked,” said he. “It is
      possible that I am utterly mistaken. The cigarettes will show
      me.”

      “My dear Holmes,” I exclaimed, “how on earth——”

      “Well, well, you may see for yourself. If not, there’s no harm
      done. Of course, we always have the optician clue to fall back
      upon, but I take a short cut when I can get it. Ah, here is the
      good Mrs. Marker! Let us enjoy five minutes of instructive
      conversation with her.”

      I may have remarked before that Holmes had, when he liked, a
      peculiarly ingratiating way with women, and that he very readily
      established terms of confidence with them. In half the time which
      he had named, he had captured the housekeeper’s goodwill and was
      chatting with her as if he had known her for years.

      “Yes, Mr. Holmes, it is as you say, sir. He does smoke something
      terrible. All day and sometimes all night, sir. I’ve seen that
      room of a morning—well, sir, you’d have thought it was a London
      fog. Poor young Mr. Smith, he was a smoker also, but not as bad
      as the professor. His health—well, I don’t know that it’s better
      nor worse for the smoking.”

      “Ah!” said Holmes, “but it kills the appetite.”

      “Well, I don’t know about that, sir.”

      “I suppose the professor eats hardly anything?”

      “Well, he is variable. I’ll say that for him.”

      “I’ll wager he took no breakfast this morning, and won’t face his
      lunch after all the cigarettes I saw him consume.”

      “Well, you’re out there, sir, as it happens, for he ate a
      remarkable big breakfast this morning. I don’t know when I’ve
      known him make a better one, and he’s ordered a good dish of
      cutlets for his lunch. I’m surprised myself, for since I came
      into that room yesterday and saw young Mr. Smith lying there on
      the floor, I couldn’t bear to look at food. Well, it takes all
      sorts to make a world, and the professor hasn’t let it take his
      appetite away.”

      We loitered the morning away in the garden. Stanley Hopkins had
      gone down to the village to look into some rumours of a strange
      woman who had been seen by some children on the Chatham Road the
      previous morning. As to my friend, all his usual energy seemed to
      have deserted him. I had never known him handle a case in such a
      half-hearted fashion. Even the news brought back by Hopkins that
      he had found the children, and that they had undoubtedly seen a
      woman exactly corresponding with Holmes’s description, and
      wearing either spectacles or eyeglasses, failed to rouse any sign
      of keen interest. He was more attentive when Susan, who waited
      upon us at lunch, volunteered the information that she believed
      Mr. Smith had been out for a walk yesterday morning, and that he
      had only returned half an hour before the tragedy occurred. I
      could not myself see the bearing of this incident, but I clearly
      perceived that Holmes was weaving it into the general scheme
      which he had formed in his brain. Suddenly he sprang from his
      chair and glanced at his watch. “Two o’clock, gentlemen,” said
      he. “We must go up and have it out with our friend, the
      professor.”

      The old man had just finished his lunch, and certainly his empty
      dish bore evidence to the good appetite with which his
      housekeeper had credited him. He was, indeed, a weird figure as
      he turned his white mane and his glowing eyes towards us. The
      eternal cigarette smouldered in his mouth. He had been dressed
      and was seated in an armchair by the fire.

      “Well, Mr. Holmes, have you solved this mystery yet?” He shoved
      the large tin of cigarettes which stood on a table beside him
      towards my companion. Holmes stretched out his hand at the same
      moment, and between them they tipped the box over the edge. For a
      minute or two we were all on our knees retrieving stray
      cigarettes from impossible places. When we rose again, I observed
      Holmes’s eyes were shining and his cheeks tinged with colour.
      Only at a crisis have I seen those battle-signals flying.

      “Yes,” said he, “I have solved it.”

      Stanley Hopkins and I stared in amazement. Something like a sneer
      quivered over the gaunt features of the old professor.

      “Indeed! In the garden?”

      “No, here.”

      “Here! When?”

      “This instant.”

      “You are surely joking, Mr. Sherlock Holmes. You compel me to
      tell you that this is too serious a matter to be treated in such
      a fashion.”

      “I have forged and tested every link of my chain, Professor
      Coram, and I am sure that it is sound. What your motives are, or
      what exact part you play in this strange business, I am not yet
      able to say. In a few minutes I shall probably hear it from your
      own lips. Meanwhile I will reconstruct what is past for your
      benefit, so that you may know the information which I still
      require.

      “A lady yesterday entered your study. She came with the intention
      of possessing herself of certain documents which were in your
      bureau. She had a key of her own. I have had an opportunity of
      examining yours, and I do not find that slight discolouration
      which the scratch made upon the varnish would have produced. You
      were not an accessory, therefore, and she came, so far as I can
      read the evidence, without your knowledge to rob you.”

      The professor blew a cloud from his lips. “This is most
      interesting and instructive,” said he. “Have you no more to add?
      Surely, having traced this lady so far, you can also say what has
      become of her.”

      “I will endeavour to do so. In the first place she was seized by
      your secretary, and stabbed him in order to escape. This
      catastrophe I am inclined to regard as an unhappy accident, for I
      am convinced that the lady had no intention of inflicting so
      grievous an injury. An assassin does not come unarmed. Horrified
      by what she had done, she rushed wildly away from the scene of
      the tragedy. Unfortunately for her, she had lost her glasses in
      the scuffle, and as she was extremely short-sighted she was
      really helpless without them. She ran down a corridor, which she
      imagined to be that by which she had come—both were lined with
      cocoanut matting—and it was only when it was too late that she
      understood that she had taken the wrong passage, and that her
      retreat was cut off behind her. What was she to do? She could not
      go back. She could not remain where she was. She must go on. She
      went on. She mounted a stair, pushed open a door, and found
      herself in your room.”

      The old man sat with his mouth open, staring wildly at Holmes.
      Amazement and fear were stamped upon his expressive features.
      Now, with an effort, he shrugged his shoulders and burst into
      insincere laughter.

      “All very fine, Mr. Holmes,” said he. “But there is one little
      flaw in your splendid theory. I was myself in my room, and I
      never left it during the day.”

      “I am aware of that, Professor Coram.”

      “And you mean to say that I could lie upon that bed and not be
      aware that a woman had entered my room?”

      “I never said so. You _were_ aware of it. You spoke with her. You
      recognized her. You aided her to escape.”

      Again the professor burst into high-keyed laughter. He had risen
      to his feet, and his eyes glowed like embers.

      “You are mad!” he cried. “You are talking insanely. I helped her
      to escape? Where is she now?”

      “She is there,” said Holmes, and he pointed to a high bookcase in
      the corner of the room.

      I saw the old man throw up his arms, a terrible convulsion passed
      over his grim face, and he fell back in his chair. At the same
      instant the bookcase at which Holmes pointed swung round upon a
      hinge, and a woman rushed out into the room. “You are right!” she
      cried, in a strange foreign voice. “You are right! I am here.”

      She was brown with the dust and draped with the cobwebs which had
      come from the walls of her hiding-place. Her face, too, was
      streaked with grime, and at the best she could never have been
      handsome, for she had the exact physical characteristics which
      Holmes had divined, with, in addition, a long and obstinate chin.
      What with her natural blindness, and what with the change from
      dark to light, she stood as one dazed, blinking about her to see
      where and who we were. And yet, in spite of all these
      disadvantages, there was a certain nobility in the woman’s
      bearing—a gallantry in the defiant chin and in the upraised head,
      which compelled something of respect and admiration.

      Stanley Hopkins had laid his hand upon her arm and claimed her as
      his prisoner, but she waved him aside gently, and yet with an
      over-mastering dignity which compelled obedience. The old man lay
      back in his chair with a twitching face, and stared at her with
      brooding eyes.

      “Yes, sir, I am your prisoner,” she said. “From where I stood I
      could hear everything, and I know that you have learned the
      truth. I confess it all. It was I who killed the young man. But
      you are right—you who say it was an accident. I did not even know
      that it was a knife which I held in my hand, for in my despair I
      snatched anything from the table and struck at him to make him
      let me go. It is the truth that I tell.”

      “Madam,” said Holmes, “I am sure that it is the truth. I fear
      that you are far from well.”

      She had turned a dreadful colour, the more ghastly under the dark
      dust-streaks upon her face. She seated herself on the side of the
      bed; then she resumed.

      “I have only a little time here,” she said, “but I would have you
      to know the whole truth. I am this man’s wife. He is not an
      Englishman. He is a Russian. His name I will not tell.”

      For the first time the old man stirred. “God bless you, Anna!” he
      cried. “God bless you!”

      She cast a look of the deepest disdain in his direction. “Why
      should you cling so hard to that wretched life of yours,
      Sergius?” said she. “It has done harm to many and good to
      none—not even to yourself. However, it is not for me to cause the
      frail thread to be snapped before God’s time. I have enough
      already upon my soul since I crossed the threshold of this cursed
      house. But I must speak or I shall be too late.

      “I have said, gentlemen, that I am this man’s wife. He was fifty
      and I a foolish girl of twenty when we married. It was in a city
      of Russia, a university—I will not name the place.”

      “God bless you, Anna!” murmured the old man again.

      “We were reformers—revolutionists—Nihilists, you understand. He
      and I and many more. Then there came a time of trouble, a police
      officer was killed, many were arrested, evidence was wanted, and
      in order to save his own life and to earn a great reward, my
      husband betrayed his own wife and his companions. Yes, we were
      all arrested upon his confession. Some of us found our way to the
      gallows, and some to Siberia. I was among these last, but my term
      was not for life. My husband came to England with his ill-gotten
      gains and has lived in quiet ever since, knowing well that if the
      Brotherhood knew where he was not a week would pass before
      justice would be done.”

      The old man reached out a trembling hand and helped himself to a
      cigarette. “I am in your hands, Anna,” said he. “You were always
      good to me.”

      “I have not yet told you the height of his villainy,” said she.
      “Among our comrades of the Order, there was one who was the
      friend of my heart. He was noble, unselfish, loving—all that my
      husband was not. He hated violence. We were all guilty—if that is
      guilt—but he was not. He wrote forever dissuading us from such a
      course. These letters would have saved him. So would my diary, in
      which, from day to day, I had entered both my feelings towards
      him and the view which each of us had taken. My husband found and
      kept both diary and letters. He hid them, and he tried hard to
      swear away the young man’s life. In this he failed, but Alexis
      was sent a convict to Siberia, where now, at this moment, he
      works in a salt mine. Think of that, you villain, you
      villain!—now, now, at this very moment, Alexis, a man whose name
      you are not worthy to speak, works and lives like a slave, and
      yet I have your life in my hands, and I let you go.”

      “You were always a noble woman, Anna,” said the old man, puffing
      at his cigarette.

      She had risen, but she fell back again with a little cry of pain.

      “I must finish,” she said. “When my term was over I set myself to
      get the diary and letters which, if sent to the Russian
      government, would procure my friend’s release. I knew that my
      husband had come to England. After months of searching I
      discovered where he was. I knew that he still had the diary, for
      when I was in Siberia I had a letter from him once, reproaching
      me and quoting some passages from its pages. Yet I was sure that,
      with his revengeful nature, he would never give it to me of his
      own free-will. I must get it for myself. With this object I
      engaged an agent from a private detective firm, who entered my
      husband’s house as a secretary—it was your second secretary,
      Sergius, the one who left you so hurriedly. He found that papers
      were kept in the cupboard, and he got an impression of the key.
      He would not go farther. He furnished me with a plan of the
      house, and he told me that in the forenoon the study was always
      empty, as the secretary was employed up here. So at last I took
      my courage in both hands, and I came down to get the papers for
      myself. I succeeded; but at what a cost!

      “I had just taken the paper; and was locking the cupboard, when
      the young man seized me. I had seen him already that morning. He
      had met me on the road, and I had asked him to tell me where
      Professor Coram lived, not knowing that he was in his employ.”

      “Exactly! Exactly!” said Holmes. “The secretary came back, and
      told his employer of the woman he had met. Then, in his last
      breath, he tried to send a message that it was she—the she whom
      he had just discussed with him.”

      “You must let me speak,” said the woman, in an imperative voice,
      and her face contracted as if in pain. “When he had fallen I
      rushed from the room, chose the wrong door, and found myself in
      my husband’s room. He spoke of giving me up. I showed him that if
      he did so, his life was in my hands. If he gave me to the law, I
      could give him to the Brotherhood. It was not that I wished to
      live for my own sake, but it was that I desired to accomplish my
      purpose. He knew that I would do what I said—that his own fate
      was involved in mine. For that reason, and for no other, he
      shielded me. He thrust me into that dark hiding-place—a relic of
      old days, known only to himself. He took his meals in his own
      room, and so was able to give me part of his food. It was agreed
      that when the police left the house I should slip away by night
      and come back no more. But in some way you have read our plans.”
      She tore from the bosom of her dress a small packet. “These are
      my last words,” said she; “here is the packet which will save
      Alexis. I confide it to your honour and to your love of justice.
      Take it! You will deliver it at the Russian Embassy. Now, I have
      done my duty, and——”

      “Stop her!” cried Holmes. He had bounded across the room and had
      wrenched a small phial from her hand.

      “Too late!” she said, sinking back on the bed. “Too late! I took
      the poison before I left my hiding-place. My head swims! I am
      going! I charge you, sir, to remember the packet.”

      “A simple case, and yet, in some ways, an instructive one,”
      Holmes remarked, as we travelled back to town. “It hinged from
      the outset upon the pince-nez. But for the fortunate chance of
      the dying man having seized these, I am not sure that we could
      ever have reached our solution. It was clear to me, from the
      strength of the glasses, that the wearer must have been very
      blind and helpless when deprived of them. When you asked me to
      believe that she walked along a narrow strip of grass without
      once making a false step, I remarked, as you may remember, that
      it was a noteworthy performance. In my mind I set it down as an
      impossible performance, save in the unlikely case that she had a
      second pair of glasses. I was forced, therefore, to consider
      seriously the hypothesis that she had remained within the house.
      On perceiving the similarity of the two corridors, it became
      clear that she might very easily have made such a mistake, and,
      in that case, it was evident that she must have entered the
      professor’s room. I was keenly on the alert, therefore, for
      whatever would bear out this supposition, and I examined the room
      narrowly for anything in the shape of a hiding-place. The carpet
      seemed continuous and firmly nailed, so I dismissed the idea of a
      trap-door. There might well be a recess behind the books. As you
      are aware, such devices are common in old libraries. I observed
      that books were piled on the floor at all other points, but that
      one bookcase was left clear. This, then, might be the door. I
      could see no marks to guide me, but the carpet was of a dun
      colour, which lends itself very well to examination. I therefore
      smoked a great number of those excellent cigarettes, and I
      dropped the ash all over the space in front of the suspected
      bookcase. It was a simple trick, but exceedingly effective. I
      then went downstairs, and I ascertained, in your presence,
      Watson, without your perceiving the drift of my remarks, that
      Professor Coram’s consumption of food had increased—as one would
      expect when he is supplying a second person. We then ascended to
      the room again, when, by upsetting the cigarette-box, I obtained
      a very excellent view of the floor, and was able to see quite
      clearly, from the traces upon the cigarette ash, that the
      prisoner had in our absence come out from her retreat. Well,
      Hopkins, here we are at Charing Cross, and I congratulate you on
      having brought your case to a successful conclusion. You are
      going to headquarters, no doubt. I think, Watson, you and I will
      drive together to the Russian Embassy.”




THE ADVENTURE OF THE MISSING THREE-QUARTER


      We were fairly accustomed to receive weird telegrams at Baker
      Street, but I have a particular recollection of one which reached
      us on a gloomy February morning, some seven or eight years ago,
      and gave Mr. Sherlock Holmes a puzzled quarter of an hour. It was
      addressed to him, and ran thus:

      Please await me. Terrible misfortune. Right wing three-quarter
      missing, indispensable to-morrow. OVERTON.

      “Strand postmark, and dispatched ten thirty-six,” said Holmes,
      reading it over and over. “Mr. Overton was evidently considerably
      excited when he sent it, and somewhat incoherent in consequence.
      Well, well, he will be here, I daresay, by the time I have looked
      through _The Times_, and then we shall know all about it. Even
      the most insignificant problem would be welcome in these stagnant
      days.”

      Things had indeed been very slow with us, and I had learned to
      dread such periods of inaction, for I knew by experience that my
      companion’s brain was so abnormally active that it was dangerous
      to leave it without material upon which to work. For years I had
      gradually weaned him from that drug mania which had threatened
      once to check his remarkable career. Now I knew that under
      ordinary conditions he no longer craved for this artificial
      stimulus, but I was well aware that the fiend was not dead but
      sleeping, and I have known that the sleep was a light one and the
      waking near when in periods of idleness I have seen the drawn
      look upon Holmes’s ascetic face, and the brooding of his deep-set
      and inscrutable eyes. Therefore I blessed this Mr. Overton
      whoever he might be, since he had come with his enigmatic message
      to break that dangerous calm which brought more peril to my
      friend than all the storms of his tempestuous life.

      As we had expected, the telegram was soon followed by its sender,
      and the card of Mr. Cyril Overton, Trinity College, Cambridge,
      announced the arrival of an enormous young man, sixteen stone of
      solid bone and muscle, who spanned the doorway with his broad
      shoulders, and looked from one of us to the other with a comely
      face which was haggard with anxiety.

      “Mr. Sherlock Holmes?”

      My companion bowed.

      “I’ve been down to Scotland Yard, Mr. Holmes. I saw Inspector
      Stanley Hopkins. He advised me to come to you. He said the case,
      so far as he could see, was more in your line than in that of the
      regular police.”

      “Pray sit down and tell me what is the matter.”

      “It’s awful, Mr. Holmes—simply awful! I wonder my hair isn’t grey.
      Godfrey Staunton—you’ve heard of him, of course? He’s simply the
      hinge that the whole team turns on. I’d rather spare two from the
      pack, and have Godfrey for my three-quarter line. Whether it’s
      passing, or tackling, or dribbling, there’s no one to touch him,
      and then, he’s got the head, and can hold us all together. What
      am I to do? That’s what I ask you, Mr. Holmes. There’s Moorhouse,
      first reserve, but he is trained as a half, and he always edges
      right in on to the scrum instead of keeping out on the touchline.
      He’s a fine place-kick, it’s true, but then he has no judgment,
      and he can’t sprint for nuts. Why, Morton or Johnson, the Oxford
      fliers, could romp round him. Stevenson is fast enough, but he
      couldn’t drop from the twenty-five line, and a three-quarter who
      can’t either punt or drop isn’t worth a place for pace alone. No,
      Mr. Holmes, we are done unless you can help me to find Godfrey
      Staunton.”

      My friend had listened with amused surprise to this long speech,
      which was poured forth with extraordinary vigour and earnestness,
      every point being driven home by the slapping of a brawny hand
      upon the speaker’s knee. When our visitor was silent Holmes
      stretched out his hand and took down letter “S” of his
      commonplace book. For once he dug in vain into that mine of
      varied information.

      “There is Arthur H. Staunton, the rising young forger,” said he,
      “and there was Henry Staunton, whom I helped to hang, but Godfrey
      Staunton is a new name to me.”

      It was our visitor’s turn to look surprised.

      “Why, Mr. Holmes, I thought you knew things,” said he. “I
      suppose, then, if you have never heard of Godfrey Staunton, you
      don’t know Cyril Overton either?”

      Holmes shook his head good humouredly.

      “Great Scott!” cried the athlete. “Why, I was first reserve for
      England against Wales, and I’ve skippered the ’Varsity all this
      year. But that’s nothing! I didn’t think there was a soul in
      England who didn’t know Godfrey Staunton, the crack
      three-quarter, Cambridge, Blackheath, and five Internationals.
      Good Lord! Mr. Holmes, where _have_ you lived?”

      Holmes laughed at the young giant’s naïve astonishment.

      “You live in a different world to me, Mr. Overton—a sweeter and
      healthier one. My ramifications stretch out into many sections of
      society, but never, I am happy to say, into amateur sport, which
      is the best and soundest thing in England. However, your
      unexpected visit this morning shows me that even in that world of
      fresh air and fair play, there may be work for me to do. So now,
      my good sir, I beg you to sit down and to tell me, slowly and
      quietly, exactly what it is that has occurred, and how you desire
      that I should help you.”

      Young Overton’s face assumed the bothered look of the man who is
      more accustomed to using his muscles than his wits, but by
      degrees, with many repetitions and obscurities which I may omit
      from his narrative, he laid his strange story before us.

      “It’s this way, Mr. Holmes. As I have said, I am the skipper of
      the Rugger team of Cambridge ’Varsity, and Godfrey Staunton is my
      best man. To-morrow we play Oxford. Yesterday we all came up, and
      we settled at Bentley’s private hotel. At ten o’clock I went
      round and saw that all the fellows had gone to roost, for I
      believe in strict training and plenty of sleep to keep a team
      fit. I had a word or two with Godfrey before he turned in. He
      seemed to me to be pale and bothered. I asked him what was the
      matter. He said he was all right—just a touch of headache. I bade
      him good-night and left him. Half an hour later, the porter tells
      me that a rough-looking man with a beard called with a note for
      Godfrey. He had not gone to bed, and the note was taken to his
      room. Godfrey read it, and fell back in a chair as if he had been
      pole-axed. The porter was so scared that he was going to fetch
      me, but Godfrey stopped him, had a drink of water, and pulled
      himself together. Then he went downstairs, said a few words to
      the man who was waiting in the hall, and the two of them went off
      together. The last that the porter saw of them, they were almost
      running down the street in the direction of the Strand. This
      morning Godfrey’s room was empty, his bed had never been slept
      in, and his things were all just as I had seen them the night
      before. He had gone off at a moment’s notice with this stranger,
      and no word has come from him since. I don’t believe he will ever
      come back. He was a sportsman, was Godfrey, down to his marrow,
      and he wouldn’t have stopped his training and let in his skipper
      if it were not for some cause that was too strong for him. No: I
      feel as if he were gone for good, and we should never see him
      again.”

      Sherlock Holmes listened with the deepest attention to this
      singular narrative.

      “What did you do?” he asked.

      “I wired to Cambridge to learn if anything had been heard of him
      there. I have had an answer. No one has seen him.”

      “Could he have got back to Cambridge?”

      “Yes, there is a late train—quarter-past eleven.”

      “But, so far as you can ascertain, he did not take it?”

      “No, he has not been seen.”

      “What did you do next?”

      “I wired to Lord Mount-James.”

      “Why to Lord Mount-James?”

      “Godfrey is an orphan, and Lord Mount-James is his nearest
      relative—his uncle, I believe.”

      “Indeed. This throws new light upon the matter. Lord Mount-James
      is one of the richest men in England.”

      “So I’ve heard Godfrey say.”

      “And your friend was closely related?”

      “Yes, he was his heir, and the old boy is nearly eighty—cram full
      of gout, too. They say he could chalk his billiard-cue with his
      knuckles. He never allowed Godfrey a shilling in his life, for he
      is an absolute miser, but it will all come to him right enough.”

      “Have you heard from Lord Mount-James?”

      “No.”

      “What motive could your friend have in going to Lord
      Mount-James?”

      “Well, something was worrying him the night before, and if it was
      to do with money it is possible that he would make for his
      nearest relative, who had so much of it, though from all I have
      heard he would not have much chance of getting it. Godfrey was
      not fond of the old man. He would not go if he could help it.”

      “Well, we can soon determine that. If your friend was going to
      his relative, Lord Mount-James, you have then to explain the
      visit of this rough-looking fellow at so late an hour, and the
      agitation that was caused by his coming.”

      Cyril Overton pressed his hands to his head. “I can make nothing
      of it,” said he.

      “Well, well, I have a clear day, and I shall be happy to look
      into the matter,” said Holmes. “I should strongly recommend you
      to make your preparations for your match without reference to
      this young gentleman. It must, as you say, have been an
      overpowering necessity which tore him away in such a fashion, and
      the same necessity is likely to hold him away. Let us step round
      together to the hotel, and see if the porter can throw any fresh
      light upon the matter.”

      Sherlock Holmes was a past-master in the art of putting a humble
      witness at his ease, and very soon, in the privacy of Godfrey
      Staunton’s abandoned room, he had extracted all that the porter
      had to tell. The visitor of the night before was not a gentleman,
      neither was he a workingman. He was simply what the porter
      described as a “medium-looking chap,” a man of fifty, beard
      grizzled, pale face, quietly dressed. He seemed himself to be
      agitated. The porter had observed his hand trembling when he had
      held out the note. Godfrey Staunton had crammed the note into his
      pocket. Staunton had not shaken hands with the man in the hall.
      They had exchanged a few sentences, of which the porter had only
      distinguished the one word “time.” Then they had hurried off in
      the manner described. It was just half-past ten by the hall
      clock.

      “Let me see,” said Holmes, seating himself on Staunton’s bed.
      “You are the day porter, are you not?”

      “Yes, sir, I go off duty at eleven.”

      “The night porter saw nothing, I suppose?”

      “No, sir, one theatre party came in late. No one else.”

      “Were you on duty all day yesterday?”

      “Yes, sir.”

      “Did you take any messages to Mr. Staunton?”

      “Yes, sir, one telegram.”

      “Ah! that’s interesting. What o’clock was this?”

      “About six.”

      “Where was Mr. Staunton when he received it?”

      “Here in his room.”

      “Were you present when he opened it?”

      “Yes, sir, I waited to see if there was an answer.”

      “Well, was there?”

      “Yes, sir, he wrote an answer.”

      “Did you take it?”

      “No, he took it himself.”

      “But he wrote it in your presence.”

      “Yes, sir. I was standing by the door, and he with his back
      turned at that table. When he had written it, he said: ‘All
      right, porter, I will take this myself.’”

      “What did he write it with?”

      “A pen, sir.”

      “Was the telegraphic form one of these on the table?”

      “Yes, sir, it was the top one.”

      Holmes rose. Taking the forms, he carried them over to the window
      and carefully examined that which was uppermost.

      “It is a pity he did not write in pencil,” said he, throwing them
      down again with a shrug of disappointment. “As you have no doubt
      frequently observed, Watson, the impression usually goes
      through—a fact which has dissolved many a happy marriage.
      However, I can find no trace here. I rejoice, however, to
      perceive that he wrote with a broad-pointed quill pen, and I can
      hardly doubt that we will find some impression upon this
      blotting-pad. Ah, yes, surely this is the very thing!”

      He tore off a strip of the blotting-paper and turned towards us
      the following hieroglyphic:

      hieroglyphic

      Cyril Overton was much excited. “Hold it to the glass!” he cried.

      “That is unnecessary,” said Holmes. “The paper is thin, and the
      reverse will give the message. Here it is.” He turned it over,
      and we read:

      the reverse

      “So that is the tail end of the telegram which Godfrey Staunton
      dispatched within a few hours of his disappearance. There are at
      least six words of the message which have escaped us; but what
      remains—‘Stand by us for God’s sake!’—proves that this young man
      saw a formidable danger which approached him, and from which
      someone else could protect him. ‘_Us_,’ mark you! Another person
      was involved. Who should it be but the pale-faced, bearded man,
      who seemed himself in so nervous a state? What, then, is the
      connection between Godfrey Staunton and the bearded man? And what
      is the third source from which each of them sought for help
      against pressing danger? Our inquiry has already narrowed down to
      that.”

      “We have only to find to whom that telegram is addressed,” I
      suggested.

      “Exactly, my dear Watson. Your reflection, though profound, had
      already crossed my mind. But I daresay it may have come to your
      notice that, counterfoil of another man’s message, there may be
      some disinclination on the part of the officials to oblige you.
      There is so much red tape in these matters. However, I have no
      doubt that with a little delicacy and finesse the end may be
      attained. Meanwhile, I should like in your presence, Mr. Overton,
      to go through these papers which have been left upon the table.”

      There were a number of letters, bills, and notebooks, which
      Holmes turned over and examined with quick, nervous fingers and
      darting, penetrating eyes. “Nothing here,” he said, at last. “By
      the way, I suppose your friend was a healthy young fellow—nothing
      amiss with him?”

      “Sound as a bell.”

      “Have you ever known him ill?”

      “Not a day. He has been laid up with a hack, and once he slipped
      his knee-cap, but that was nothing.”

      “Perhaps he was not so strong as you suppose. I should think he
      may have had some secret trouble. With your assent, I will put
      one or two of these papers in my pocket, in case they should bear
      upon our future inquiry.”

      “One moment—one moment!” cried a querulous voice, and we looked
      up to find a queer little old man, jerking and twitching in the
      doorway. He was dressed in rusty black, with a very broad-brimmed
      top-hat and a loose white necktie—the whole effect being that of
      a very rustic parson or of an undertaker’s mute. Yet, in spite of
      his shabby and even absurd appearance, his voice had a sharp
      crackle, and his manner a quick intensity which commanded
      attention.

      “Who are you, sir, and by what right do you touch this
      gentleman’s papers?” he asked.

      “I am a private detective, and I am endeavouring to explain his
      disappearance.”

      “Oh, you are, are you? And who instructed you, eh?”

      “This gentleman, Mr. Staunton’s friend, was referred to me by
      Scotland Yard.”

      “Who are you, sir?”

      “I am Cyril Overton.”

      “Then it is you who sent me a telegram. My name is Lord
      Mount-James. I came round as quickly as the Bayswater bus would
      bring me. So you have instructed a detective?”

      “Yes, sir.”

      “And are you prepared to meet the cost?”

      “I have no doubt, sir, that my friend Godfrey, when we find him,
      will be prepared to do that.”

      “But if he is never found, eh? Answer me that!”

      “In that case, no doubt his family——”

      “Nothing of the sort, sir!” screamed the little man. “Don’t look
      to me for a penny—not a penny! You understand that, Mr.
      Detective! I am all the family that this young man has got, and I
      tell you that I am not responsible. If he has any expectations it
      is due to the fact that I have never wasted money, and I do not
      propose to begin to do so now. As to those papers with which you
      are making so free, I may tell you that in case there should be
      anything of any value among them, you will be held strictly to
      account for what you do with them.”

      “Very good, sir,” said Sherlock Holmes. “May I ask, in the
      meanwhile, whether you have yourself any theory to account for
      this young man’s disappearance?”

      “No, sir, I have not. He is big enough and old enough to look
      after himself, and if he is so foolish as to lose himself, I
      entirely refuse to accept the responsibility of hunting for him.”

      “I quite understand your position,” said Holmes, with a
      mischievous twinkle in his eyes. “Perhaps you don’t quite
      understand mine. Godfrey Staunton appears to have been a poor
      man. If he has been kidnapped, it could not have been for
      anything which he himself possesses. The fame of your wealth has
      gone abroad, Lord Mount-James, and it is entirely possible that a
      gang of thieves have secured your nephew in order to gain from
      him some information as to your house, your habits, and your
      treasure.”

      The face of our unpleasant little visitor turned as white as his
      neckcloth.

      “Heavens, sir, what an idea! I never thought of such villainy!
      What inhuman rogues there are in the world! But Godfrey is a fine
      lad—a staunch lad. Nothing would induce him to give his old uncle
      away. I’ll have the plate moved over to the bank this evening. In
      the meantime spare no pains, Mr. Detective! I beg you to leave no
      stone unturned to bring him safely back. As to money, well, so
      far as a fiver or even a tenner goes you can always look to me.”

      Even in his chastened frame of mind, the noble miser could give
      us no information which could help us, for he knew little of the
      private life of his nephew. Our only clue lay in the truncated
      telegram, and with a copy of this in his hand Holmes set forth to
      find a second link for his chain. We had shaken off Lord
      Mount-James, and Overton had gone to consult with the other
      members of his team over the misfortune which had befallen them.

      There was a telegraph-office at a short distance from the hotel.
      We halted outside it.

      “It’s worth trying, Watson,” said Holmes. “Of course, with a
      warrant we could demand to see the counterfoils, but we have not
      reached that stage yet. I don’t suppose they remember faces in so
      busy a place. Let us venture it.”

      “I am sorry to trouble you,” said he, in his blandest manner, to
      the young woman behind the grating; “there is some small mistake
      about a telegram I sent yesterday. I have had no answer, and I
      very much fear that I must have omitted to put my name at the
      end. Could you tell me if this was so?”

      The young woman turned over a sheaf of counterfoils.

      “What o’clock was it?” she asked.

      “A little after six.”

      “Whom was it to?”

      Holmes put his finger to his lips and glanced at me. “The last
      words in it were ‘For God’s sake,’” he whispered, confidentially;
      “I am very anxious at getting no answer.”

      The young woman separated one of the forms.

      “This is it. There is no name,” said she, smoothing it out upon
      the counter.

      “Then that, of course, accounts for my getting no answer,” said
      Holmes. “Dear me, how very stupid of me, to be sure!
      Good-morning, miss, and many thanks for having relieved my mind.”
      He chuckled and rubbed his hands when we found ourselves in the
      street once more.

      “Well?” I asked.

      “We progress, my dear Watson, we progress. I had seven different
      schemes for getting a glimpse of that telegram, but I could
      hardly hope to succeed the very first time.”

      “And what have you gained?”

      “A starting-point for our investigation.” He hailed a cab.
      “King’s Cross Station,” said he.

      “We have a journey, then?”

      “Yes, I think we must run down to Cambridge together. All the
      indications seem to me to point in that direction.”

      “Tell me,” I asked, as we rattled up Gray’s Inn Road, “have you
      any suspicion yet as to the cause of the disappearance? I don’t
      think that among all our cases I have known one where the motives
      are more obscure. Surely you don’t really imagine that he may be
      kidnapped in order to give information against his wealthy
      uncle?”

      “I confess, my dear Watson, that that does not appeal to me as a
      very probable explanation. It struck me, however, as being the
      one which was most likely to interest that exceedingly unpleasant
      old person.”

      “It certainly did that; but what are your alternatives?”

      “I could mention several. You must admit that it is curious and
      suggestive that this incident should occur on the eve of this
      important match, and should involve the only man whose presence
      seems essential to the success of the side. It may, of course, be
      a coincidence, but it is interesting. Amateur sport is free from
      betting, but a good deal of outside betting goes on among the
      public, and it is possible that it might be worth someone’s while
      to get at a player as the ruffians of the turf get at a
      race-horse. There is one explanation. A second very obvious one
      is that this young man really is the heir of a great property,
      however modest his means may at present be, and it is not
      impossible that a plot to hold him for ransom might be
      concocted.”

      “These theories take no account of the telegram.”

      “Quite true, Watson. The telegram still remains the only solid
      thing with which we have to deal, and we must not permit our
      attention to wander away from it. It is to gain light upon the
      purpose of this telegram that we are now upon our way to
      Cambridge. The path of our investigation is at present obscure,
      but I shall be very much surprised if before evening we have not
      cleared it up, or made a considerable advance along it.”

      It was already dark when we reached the old university city.
      Holmes took a cab at the station and ordered the man to drive to
      the house of Dr. Leslie Armstrong. A few minutes later, we had
      stopped at a large mansion in the busiest thoroughfare. We were
      shown in, and after a long wait were at last admitted into the
      consulting-room, where we found the doctor seated behind his
      table.

      It argues the degree in which I had lost touch with my profession
      that the name of Leslie Armstrong was unknown to me. Now I am
      aware that he is not only one of the heads of the medical school
      of the university, but a thinker of European reputation in more
      than one branch of science. Yet even without knowing his
      brilliant record one could not fail to be impressed by a mere
      glance at the man, the square, massive face, the brooding eyes
      under the thatched brows, and the granite moulding of the
      inflexible jaw. A man of deep character, a man with an alert
      mind, grim, ascetic, self-contained, formidable—so I read Dr.
      Leslie Armstrong. He held my friend’s card in his hand, and he
      looked up with no very pleased expression upon his dour features.

      “I have heard your name, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, and I am aware of
      your profession—one of which I by no means approve.”

      “In that, Doctor, you will find yourself in agreement with every
      criminal in the country,” said my friend, quietly.

      “So far as your efforts are directed towards the suppression of
      crime, sir, they must have the support of every reasonable member
      of the community, though I cannot doubt that the official
      machinery is amply sufficient for the purpose. Where your calling
      is more open to criticism is when you pry into the secrets of
      private individuals, when you rake up family matters which are
      better hidden, and when you incidentally waste the time of men
      who are more busy than yourself. At the present moment, for
      example, I should be writing a treatise instead of conversing
      with you.”

      “No doubt, Doctor; and yet the conversation may prove more
      important than the treatise. Incidentally, I may tell you that we
      are doing the reverse of what you very justly blame, and that we
      are endeavouring to prevent anything like public exposure of
      private matters which must necessarily follow when once the case
      is fairly in the hands of the official police. You may look upon
      me simply as an irregular pioneer, who goes in front of the
      regular forces of the country. I have come to ask you about Mr.
      Godfrey Staunton.”

      “What about him?”

      “You know him, do you not?”

      “He is an intimate friend of mine.”

      “You are aware that he has disappeared?”

      “Ah, indeed!” There was no change of expression in the rugged
      features of the doctor.

      “He left his hotel last night—he has not been heard of.”

      “No doubt he will return.”

      “To-morrow is the ’Varsity football match.”

      “I have no sympathy with these childish games. The young man’s
      fate interests me deeply, since I know him and like him. The
      football match does not come within my horizon at all.”

      “I claim your sympathy, then, in my investigation of Mr.
      Staunton’s fate. Do you know where he is?”

      “Certainly not.”

      “You have not seen him since yesterday?”

      “No, I have not.”

      “Was Mr. Staunton a healthy man?”

      “Absolutely.”

      “Did you ever know him ill?”

      “Never.”

      Holmes popped a sheet of paper before the doctor’s eyes. “Then
      perhaps you will explain this receipted bill for thirteen
      guineas, paid by Mr. Godfrey Staunton last month to Dr. Leslie
      Armstrong, of Cambridge. I picked it out from among the papers
      upon his desk.”

      The doctor flushed with anger.

      “I do not feel that there is any reason why I should render an
      explanation to you, Mr. Holmes.”

      Holmes replaced the bill in his notebook. “If you prefer a public
      explanation, it must come sooner or later,” said he. “I have
      already told you that I can hush up that which others will be
      bound to publish, and you would really be wiser to take me into
      your complete confidence.”

      “I know nothing about it.”

      “Did you hear from Mr. Staunton in London?”

      “Certainly not.”

      “Dear me, dear me—the postoffice again!” Holmes sighed, wearily.
      “A most urgent telegram was dispatched to you from London by
      Godfrey Staunton at six-fifteen yesterday evening—a telegram
      which is undoubtedly associated with his disappearance—and yet
      you have not had it. It is most culpable. I shall certainly go
      down to the office here and register a complaint.”

      Dr. Leslie Armstrong sprang up from behind his desk, and his dark
      face was crimson with fury.

      “I’ll trouble you to walk out of my house, sir,” said he. “You
      can tell your employer, Lord Mount-James, that I do not wish to
      have anything to do either with him or with his agents. No,
      sir—not another word!” He rang the bell furiously. “John, show
      these gentlemen out!” A pompous butler ushered us severely to the
      door, and we found ourselves in the street. Holmes burst out
      laughing.

      “Dr. Leslie Armstrong is certainly a man of energy and
      character,” said he. “I have not seen a man who, if he turns his
      talents that way, was more calculated to fill the gap left by the
      illustrious Moriarty. And now, my poor Watson, here we are,
      stranded and friendless in this inhospitable town, which we
      cannot leave without abandoning our case. This little inn just
      opposite Armstrong’s house is singularly adapted to our needs. If
      you would engage a front room and purchase the necessaries for
      the night, I may have time to make a few inquiries.”

      These few inquiries proved, however, to be a more lengthy
      proceeding than Holmes had imagined, for he did not return to the
      inn until nearly nine o’clock. He was pale and dejected, stained
      with dust, and exhausted with hunger and fatigue. A cold supper
      was ready upon the table, and when his needs were satisfied and
      his pipe alight he was ready to take that half comic and wholly
      philosophic view which was natural to him when his affairs were
      going awry. The sound of carriage wheels caused him to rise and
      glance out of the window. A brougham and pair of greys, under the
      glare of a gas-lamp, stood before the doctor’s door.

      “It’s been out three hours,” said Holmes; “started at half-past
      six, and here it is back again. That gives a radius of ten or
      twelve miles, and he does it once, or sometimes twice, a day.”

      “No unusual thing for a doctor in practice.”

      “But Armstrong is not really a doctor in practice. He is a
      lecturer and a consultant, but he does not care for general
      practice, which distracts him from his literary work. Why, then,
      does he make these long journeys, which must be exceedingly
      irksome to him, and who is it that he visits?”

      “His coachman——”

      “My dear Watson, can you doubt that it was to him that I first
      applied? I do not know whether it came from his own innate
      depravity or from the promptings of his master, but he was rude
      enough to set a dog at me. Neither dog nor man liked the look of
      my stick, however, and the matter fell through. Relations were
      strained after that, and further inquiries out of the question.
      All that I have learned I got from a friendly native in the yard
      of our own inn. It was he who told me of the doctor’s habits and
      of his daily journey. At that instant, to give point to his
      words, the carriage came round to the door.”

      “Could you not follow it?”

      “Excellent, Watson! You are scintillating this evening. The idea
      did cross my mind. There is, as you may have observed, a bicycle
      shop next to our inn. Into this I rushed, engaged a bicycle, and
      was able to get started before the carriage was quite out of
      sight. I rapidly overtook it, and then, keeping at a discreet
      distance of a hundred yards or so, I followed its lights until we
      were clear of the town. We had got well out on the country road,
      when a somewhat mortifying incident occurred. The carriage
      stopped, the doctor alighted, walked swiftly back to where I had
      also halted, and told me in an excellent sardonic fashion that he
      feared the road was narrow, and that he hoped his carriage did
      not impede the passage of my bicycle. Nothing could have been
      more admirable than his way of putting it. I at once rode past
      the carriage, and, keeping to the main road, I went on for a few
      miles, and then halted in a convenient place to see if the
      carriage passed. There was no sign of it, however, and so it
      became evident that it had turned down one of several side roads
      which I had observed. I rode back, but again saw nothing of the
      carriage, and now, as you perceive, it has returned after me. Of
      course, I had at the outset no particular reason to connect these
      journeys with the disappearance of Godfrey Staunton, and was only
      inclined to investigate them on the general grounds that
      everything which concerns Dr. Armstrong is at present of interest
      to us, but, now that I find he keeps so keen a look-out upon
      anyone who may follow him on these excursions, the affair appears
      more important, and I shall not be satisfied until I have made
      the matter clear.”

      “We can follow him to-morrow.”

      “Can we? It is not so easy as you seem to think. You are not
      familiar with Cambridgeshire scenery, are you? It does not lend
      itself to concealment. All this country that I passed over
      to-night is as flat and clean as the palm of your hand, and the
      man we are following is no fool, as he very clearly showed
      to-night. I have wired to Overton to let us know any fresh London
      developments at this address, and in the meantime we can only
      concentrate our attention upon Dr. Armstrong, whose name the
      obliging young lady at the office allowed me to read upon the
      counterfoil of Staunton’s urgent message. He knows where the
      young man is—to that I’ll swear, and if he knows, then it must be
      our own fault if we cannot manage to know also. At present it
      must be admitted that the odd trick is in his possession, and, as
      you are aware, Watson, it is not my habit to leave the game in
      that condition.”

      And yet the next day brought us no nearer to the solution of the
      mystery. A note was handed in after breakfast, which Holmes
      passed across to me with a smile.

      SIR [it ran],—I can assure you that you are wasting your time in
      dogging my movements. I have, as you discovered last night, a
      window at the back of my brougham, and if you desire a
      twenty-mile ride which will lead you to the spot from which you
      started, you have only to follow me. Meanwhile, I can inform you
      that no spying upon me can in any way help Mr. Godfrey Staunton,
      and I am convinced that the best service you can do to that
      gentleman is to return at once to London and to report to your
      employer that you are unable to trace him. Your time in Cambridge
      will certainly be wasted.

      Yours faithfully,
      LESLIE ARMSTRONG.

      “An outspoken, honest antagonist is the doctor,” said Holmes.
      “Well, well, he excites my curiosity, and I must really know
      before I leave him.”

      “His carriage is at his door now,” said I. “There he is stepping
      into it. I saw him glance up at our window as he did so. Suppose
      I try my luck upon the bicycle?”

      “No, no, my dear Watson! With all respect for your natural
      acumen, I do not think that you are quite a match for the worthy
      doctor. I think that possibly I can attain our end by some
      independent explorations of my own. I am afraid that I must leave
      you to your own devices, as the appearance of _two_ inquiring
      strangers upon a sleepy countryside might excite more gossip than
      I care for. No doubt you will find some sights to amuse you in
      this venerable city, and I hope to bring back a more favourable
      report to you before evening.”

      Once more, however, my friend was destined to be disappointed. He
      came back at night weary and unsuccessful.

      “I have had a blank day, Watson. Having got the doctor’s general
      direction, I spent the day in visiting all the villages upon that
      side of Cambridge, and comparing notes with publicans and other
      local news agencies. I have covered some ground. Chesterton,
      Histon, Waterbeach, and Oakington have each been explored, and
      have each proved disappointing. The daily appearance of a
      brougham and pair could hardly have been overlooked in such
      Sleepy Hollows. The doctor has scored once more. Is there a
      telegram for me?”

      “Yes, I opened it. Here it is:

      “Ask for Pompey from Jeremy Dixon, Trinity College.”

      “I don’t understand it.”

      “Oh, it is clear enough. It is from our friend Overton, and is in
      answer to a question from me. I’ll just send round a note to Mr.
      Jeremy Dixon, and then I have no doubt that our luck will turn.
      By the way, is there any news of the match?”

      “Yes, the local evening paper has an excellent account in its
      last edition. Oxford won by a goal and two tries. The last
      sentences of the description say:

      “‘The defeat of the Light Blues may be entirely attributed to the
      unfortunate absence of the crack International, Godfrey Staunton,
      whose want was felt at every instant of the game. The lack of
      combination in the three-quarter line and their weakness both in
      attack and defence more than neutralized the efforts of a heavy
      and hard-working pack.’”

      “Then our friend Overton’s forebodings have been justified,” said
      Holmes. “Personally I am in agreement with Dr. Armstrong, and
      football does not come within my horizon. Early to bed to-night,
      Watson, for I foresee that to-morrow may be an eventful day.”

      I was horrified by my first glimpse of Holmes next morning, for
      he sat by the fire holding his tiny hypodermic syringe. I
      associated that instrument with the single weakness of his
      nature, and I feared the worst when I saw it glittering in his
      hand. He laughed at my expression of dismay and laid it upon the
      table.

      “No, no, my dear fellow, there is no cause for alarm. It is not
      upon this occasion the instrument of evil, but it will rather
      prove to be the key which will unlock our mystery. On this
      syringe I base all my hopes. I have just returned from a small
      scouting expedition, and everything is favourable. Eat a good
      breakfast, Watson, for I propose to get upon Dr. Armstrong’s
      trail to-day, and once on it I will not stop for rest or food
      until I run him to his burrow.”

      “In that case,” said I, “we had best carry our breakfast with us,
      for he is making an early start. His carriage is at the door.”

      “Never mind. Let him go. He will be clever if he can drive where
      I cannot follow him. When you have finished, come downstairs with
      me, and I will introduce you to a detective who is a very eminent
      specialist in the work that lies before us.”

      When we descended I followed Holmes into the stable yard, where
      he opened the door of a loose-box and led out a squat, lop-eared,
      white-and-tan dog, something between a beagle and a foxhound.

      “Let me introduce you to Pompey,” said he. “Pompey is the pride
      of the local draghounds—no very great flier, as his build will
      show, but a staunch hound on a scent. Well, Pompey, you may not
      be fast, but I expect you will be too fast for a couple of
      middle-aged London gentlemen, so I will take the liberty of
      fastening this leather leash to your collar. Now, boy, come
      along, and show what you can do.” He led him across to the
      doctor’s door. The dog sniffed round for an instant, and then
      with a shrill whine of excitement started off down the street,
      tugging at his leash in his efforts to go faster. In half an
      hour, we were clear of the town and hastening down a country
      road.

      “What have you done, Holmes?” I asked.

      “A threadbare and venerable device, but useful upon occasion. I
      walked into the doctor’s yard this morning, and shot my syringe
      full of aniseed over the hind wheel. A draghound will follow
      aniseed from here to John o’Groat’s, and our friend, Armstrong,
      would have to drive through the Cam before he would shake Pompey
      off his trail. Oh, the cunning rascal! This is how he gave me the
      slip the other night.”

      The dog had suddenly turned out of the main road into a
      grass-grown lane. Half a mile farther this opened into another
      broad road, and the trail turned hard to the right in the
      direction of the town, which we had just quitted. The road took a
      sweep to the south of the town, and continued in the opposite
      direction to that in which we started.

      “This _détour_ has been entirely for our benefit, then?” said
      Holmes. “No wonder that my inquiries among those villagers led to
      nothing. The doctor has certainly played the game for all it is
      worth, and one would like to know the reason for such elaborate
      deception. This should be the village of Trumpington to the right
      of us. And, by Jove! here is the brougham coming round the
      corner. Quick, Watson—quick, or we are done!”

      He sprang through a gate into a field, dragging the reluctant
      Pompey after him. We had hardly got under the shelter of the
      hedge when the carriage rattled past. I caught a glimpse of Dr.
      Armstrong within, his shoulders bowed, his head sunk on his
      hands, the very image of distress. I could tell by my companion’s
      graver face that he also had seen.

      “I fear there is some dark ending to our quest,” said he. “It
      cannot be long before we know it. Come, Pompey! Ah, it is the
      cottage in the field!”

      There could be no doubt that we had reached the end of our
      journey. Pompey ran about and whined eagerly outside the gate,
      where the marks of the brougham’s wheels were still to be seen. A
      footpath led across to the lonely cottage. Holmes tied the dog to
      the hedge, and we hastened onward. My friend knocked at the
      little rustic door, and knocked again without response. And yet
      the cottage was not deserted, for a low sound came to our ears—a
      kind of drone of misery and despair which was indescribably
      melancholy. Holmes paused irresolute, and then he glanced back at
      the road which he had just traversed. A brougham was coming down
      it, and there could be no mistaking those grey horses.

      “By Jove, the doctor is coming back!” cried Holmes. “That settles
      it. We are bound to see what it means before he comes.”

      He opened the door, and we stepped into the hall. The droning
      sound swelled louder upon our ears until it became one long, deep
      wail of distress. It came from upstairs. Holmes darted up, and I
      followed him. He pushed open a half-closed door, and we both
      stood appalled at the sight before us.

      A woman, young and beautiful, was lying dead upon the bed. Her
      calm pale face, with dim, wide-opened blue eyes, looked upward
      from amid a great tangle of golden hair. At the foot of the bed,
      half sitting, half kneeling, his face buried in the clothes, was
      a young man, whose frame was racked by his sobs. So absorbed was
      he by his bitter grief, that he never looked up until Holmes’s
      hand was on his shoulder.

      “Are you Mr. Godfrey Staunton?”

      “Yes, yes, I am—but you are too late. She is dead.”

      The man was so dazed that he could not be made to understand that
      we were anything but doctors who had been sent to his assistance.
      Holmes was endeavouring to utter a few words of consolation and
      to explain the alarm which had been caused to his friends by his
      sudden disappearance when there was a step upon the stairs, and
      there was the heavy, stern, questioning face of Dr. Armstrong at
      the door.

      “So, gentlemen,” said he, “you have attained your end and have
      certainly chosen a particularly delicate moment for your
      intrusion. I would not brawl in the presence of death, but I can
      assure you that if I were a younger man your monstrous conduct
      would not pass with impunity.”

      “Excuse me, Dr. Armstrong, I think we are a little at
      cross-purposes,” said my friend, with dignity. “If you could step
      downstairs with us, we may each be able to give some light to the
      other upon this miserable affair.”

      A minute later, the grim doctor and ourselves were in the
      sitting-room below.

      “Well, sir?” said he.

      “I wish you to understand, in the first place, that I am not
      employed by Lord Mount-James, and that my sympathies in this
      matter are entirely against that nobleman. When a man is lost it
      is my duty to ascertain his fate, but having done so the matter
      ends so far as I am concerned, and so long as there is nothing
      criminal I am much more anxious to hush up private scandals than
      to give them publicity. If, as I imagine, there is no breach of
      the law in this matter, you can absolutely depend upon my
      discretion and my cooperation in keeping the facts out of the
      papers.”

      Dr. Armstrong took a quick step forward and wrung Holmes by the
      hand.

      “You are a good fellow,” said he. “I had misjudged you. I thank
      heaven that my compunction at leaving poor Staunton all alone in
      this plight caused me to turn my carriage back and so to make
      your acquaintance. Knowing as much as you do, the situation is
      very easily explained. A year ago Godfrey Staunton lodged in
      London for a time and became passionately attached to his
      landlady’s daughter, whom he married. She was as good as she was
      beautiful and as intelligent as she was good. No man need be
      ashamed of such a wife. But Godfrey was the heir to this crabbed
      old nobleman, and it was quite certain that the news of his
      marriage would have been the end of his inheritance. I knew the
      lad well, and I loved him for his many excellent qualities. I did
      all I could to help him to keep things straight. We did our very
      best to keep the thing from everyone, for, when once such a
      whisper gets about, it is not long before everyone has heard it.
      Thanks to this lonely cottage and his own discretion, Godfrey has
      up to now succeeded. Their secret was known to no one save to me
      and to one excellent servant, who has at present gone for
      assistance to Trumpington. But at last there came a terrible blow
      in the shape of dangerous illness to his wife. It was consumption
      of the most virulent kind. The poor boy was half crazed with
      grief, and yet he had to go to London to play this match, for he
      could not get out of it without explanations which would expose
      his secret. I tried to cheer him up by wire, and he sent me one
      in reply, imploring me to do all I could. This was the telegram
      which you appear in some inexplicable way to have seen. I did not
      tell him how urgent the danger was, for I knew that he could do
      no good here, but I sent the truth to the girl’s father, and he
      very injudiciously communicated it to Godfrey. The result was
      that he came straight away in a state bordering on frenzy, and
      has remained in the same state, kneeling at the end of her bed,
      until this morning death put an end to her sufferings. That is
      all, Mr. Holmes, and I am sure that I can rely upon your
      discretion and that of your friend.”

      Holmes grasped the doctor’s hand.

      “Come, Watson,” said he, and we passed from that house of grief
      into the pale sunlight of the winter day.




THE ADVENTURE OF THE ABBEY GRANGE


      It was on a bitterly cold and frosty morning, towards the end of
      the winter of ’97, that I was awakened by a tugging at my
      shoulder. It was Holmes. The candle in his hand shone upon his
      eager, stooping face, and told me at a glance that something was
      amiss.

      “Come, Watson, come!” he cried. “The game is afoot. Not a word!
      Into your clothes and come!”

      Ten minutes later we were both in a cab, and rattling through the
      silent streets on our way to Charing Cross Station. The first
      faint winter’s dawn was beginning to appear, and we could dimly
      see the occasional figure of an early workman as he passed us,
      blurred and indistinct in the opalescent London reek. Holmes
      nestled in silence into his heavy coat, and I was glad to do the
      same, for the air was most bitter, and neither of us had broken
      our fast.

      It was not until we had consumed some hot tea at the station and
      taken our places in the Kentish train that we were sufficiently
      thawed, he to speak and I to listen. Holmes drew a note from his
      pocket, and read aloud:

      Abbey Grange, Marsham, Kent, 3:30 A.M.
      MY DEAR MR. HOLMES:

      I should be very glad of your immediate assistance in what
      promises to be a most remarkable case. It is something quite in
      your line. Except for releasing the lady I will see that
      everything is kept exactly as I have found it, but I beg you not
      to lose an instant, as it is difficult to leave Sir Eustace
      there.

      Yours faithfully,
      STANLEY HOPKINS.

      “Hopkins has called me in seven times, and on each occasion his
      summons has been entirely justified,” said Holmes. “I fancy that
      every one of his cases has found its way into your collection,
      and I must admit, Watson, that you have some power of selection,
      which atones for much which I deplore in your narratives. Your
      fatal habit of looking at everything from the point of view of a
      story instead of as a scientific exercise has ruined what might
      have been an instructive and even classical series of
      demonstrations. You slur over work of the utmost finesse and
      delicacy, in order to dwell upon sensational details which may
      excite, but cannot possibly instruct, the reader.”

      “Why do you not write them yourself?” I said, with some
      bitterness.

      “I will, my dear Watson, I will. At present I am, as you know,
      fairly busy, but I propose to devote my declining years to the
      composition of a textbook, which shall focus the whole art of
      detection into one volume. Our present research appears to be a
      case of murder.”

      “You think this Sir Eustace is dead, then?”

      “I should say so. Hopkins’s writing shows considerable agitation,
      and he is not an emotional man. Yes, I gather there has been
      violence, and that the body is left for our inspection. A mere
      suicide would not have caused him to send for me. As to the
      release of the lady, it would appear that she has been locked in
      her room during the tragedy. We are moving in high life, Watson,
      crackling paper, ‘E.B.’ monogram, coat-of-arms, picturesque
      address. I think that friend Hopkins will live up to his
      reputation, and that we shall have an interesting morning. The
      crime was committed before twelve last night.”

      “How can you possibly tell?”

      “By an inspection of the trains, and by reckoning the time. The
      local police had to be called in, they had to communicate with
      Scotland Yard, Hopkins had to go out, and he in turn had to send
      for me. All that makes a fair night’s work. Well, here we are at
      Chiselhurst Station, and we shall soon set our doubts at rest.”

      A drive of a couple of miles through narrow country lanes brought
      us to a park gate, which was opened for us by an old
      lodge-keeper, whose haggard face bore the reflection of some
      great disaster. The avenue ran through a noble park, between
      lines of ancient elms, and ended in a low, widespread house,
      pillared in front after the fashion of Palladio. The central part
      was evidently of a great age and shrouded in ivy, but the large
      windows showed that modern changes had been carried out, and one
      wing of the house appeared to be entirely new. The youthful
      figure and alert, eager face of Inspector Stanley Hopkins
      confronted us in the open doorway.

      “I’m very glad you have come, Mr. Holmes. And you, too, Dr.
      Watson. But, indeed, if I had my time over again, I should not
      have troubled you, for since the lady has come to herself, she
      has given so clear an account of the affair that there is not
      much left for us to do. You remember that Lewisham gang of
      burglars?”

      “What, the three Randalls?”

      “Exactly; the father and two sons. It’s their work. I have not a
      doubt of it. They did a job at Sydenham a fortnight ago and were
      seen and described. Rather cool to do another so soon and so
      near, but it is they, beyond all doubt. It’s a hanging matter
      this time.”

      “Sir Eustace is dead, then?”

      “Yes, his head was knocked in with his own poker.”

      “Sir Eustace Brackenstall, the driver tells me.”

      “Exactly—one of the richest men in Kent—Lady Brackenstall is in
      the morning-room. Poor lady, she has had a most dreadful
      experience. She seemed half dead when I saw her first. I think
      you had best see her and hear her account of the facts. Then we
      will examine the dining-room together.”

      Lady Brackenstall was no ordinary person. Seldom have I seen so
      graceful a figure, so womanly a presence, and so beautiful a
      face. She was a blonde, golden-haired, blue-eyed, and would no
      doubt have had the perfect complexion which goes with such
      colouring, had not her recent experience left her drawn and
      haggard. Her sufferings were physical as well as mental, for over
      one eye rose a hideous, plum-coloured swelling, which her maid, a
      tall, austere woman, was bathing assiduously with vinegar and
      water. The lady lay back exhausted upon a couch, but her quick,
      observant gaze, as we entered the room, and the alert expression
      of her beautiful features, showed that neither her wits nor her
      courage had been shaken by her terrible experience. She was
      enveloped in a loose dressing-gown of blue and silver, but a
      black sequin-covered dinner-dress lay upon the couch beside her.

      “I have told you all that happened, Mr. Hopkins,” she said,
      wearily. “Could you not repeat it for me? Well, if you think it
      necessary, I will tell these gentlemen what occurred. Have they
      been in the dining-room yet?”

      “I thought they had better hear your ladyship’s story first.”

      “I shall be glad when you can arrange matters. It is horrible to
      me to think of him still lying there.” She shuddered and buried
      her face in her hands. As she did so, the loose gown fell back
      from her forearms. Holmes uttered an exclamation.

      “You have other injuries, madam! What is this?” Two vivid red
      spots stood out on one of the white, round limbs. She hastily
      covered it.

      “It is nothing. It has no connection with this hideous business
      to-night. If you and your friend will sit down, I will tell you
      all I can.

      “I am the wife of Sir Eustace Brackenstall. I have been married
      about a year. I suppose that it is no use my attempting to
      conceal that our marriage has not been a happy one. I fear that
      all our neighbours would tell you that, even if I were to attempt
      to deny it. Perhaps the fault may be partly mine. I was brought
      up in the freer, less conventional atmosphere of South Australia,
      and this English life, with its proprieties and its primness, is
      not congenial to me. But the main reason lies in the one fact,
      which is notorious to everyone, and that is that Sir Eustace was
      a confirmed drunkard. To be with such a man for an hour is
      unpleasant. Can you imagine what it means for a sensitive and
      high-spirited woman to be tied to him for day and night? It is a
      sacrilege, a crime, a villainy to hold that such a marriage is
      binding. I say that these monstrous laws of yours will bring a
      curse upon the land—God will not let such wickedness endure.” For
      an instant she sat up, her cheeks flushed, and her eyes blazing
      from under the terrible mark upon her brow. Then the strong,
      soothing hand of the austere maid drew her head down on to the
      cushion, and the wild anger died away into passionate sobbing. At
      last she continued:

      “I will tell you about last night. You are aware, perhaps, that
      in this house all the servants sleep in the modern wing. This
      central block is made up of the dwelling-rooms, with the kitchen
      behind and our bedroom above. My maid, Theresa, sleeps above my
      room. There is no one else, and no sound could alarm those who
      are in the farther wing. This must have been well-known to the
      robbers, or they would not have acted as they did.

      “Sir Eustace retired about half-past ten. The servants had
      already gone to their quarters. Only my maid was up, and she had
      remained in her room at the top of the house until I needed her
      services. I sat until after eleven in this room, absorbed in a
      book. Then I walked round to see that all was right before I went
      upstairs. It was my custom to do this myself, for, as I have
      explained, Sir Eustace was not always to be trusted. I went into
      the kitchen, the butler’s pantry, the gun-room, the
      billiard-room, the drawing-room, and finally the dining-room. As
      I approached the window, which is covered with thick curtains, I
      suddenly felt the wind blow upon my face and realized that it was
      open. I flung the curtain aside and found myself face to face
      with a broad-shouldered elderly man, who had just stepped into
      the room. The window is a long French one, which really forms a
      door leading to the lawn. I held my bedroom candle lit in my
      hand, and, by its light, behind the first man I saw two others,
      who were in the act of entering. I stepped back, but the fellow
      was on me in an instant. He caught me first by the wrist and then
      by the throat. I opened my mouth to scream, but he struck me a
      savage blow with his fist over the eye, and felled me to the
      ground. I must have been unconscious for a few minutes, for when
      I came to myself, I found that they had torn down the bell-rope,
      and had secured me tightly to the oaken chair which stands at the
      head of the dining-table. I was so firmly bound that I could not
      move, and a handkerchief round my mouth prevented me from
      uttering a sound. It was at this instant that my unfortunate
      husband entered the room. He had evidently heard some suspicious
      sounds, and he came prepared for such a scene as he found. He was
      dressed in nightshirt and trousers, with his favourite blackthorn
      cudgel in his hand. He rushed at the burglars, but another—it was
      an elderly man—stooped, picked the poker out of the grate and
      struck him a horrible blow as he passed. He fell with a groan and
      never moved again. I fainted once more, but again it could only
      have been for a very few minutes during which I was insensible.
      When I opened my eyes I found that they had collected the silver
      from the sideboard, and they had drawn a bottle of wine which
      stood there. Each of them had a glass in his hand. I have already
      told you, have I not, that one was elderly, with a beard, and the
      others young, hairless lads. They might have been a father with
      his two sons. They talked together in whispers. Then they came
      over and made sure that I was securely bound. Finally they
      withdrew, closing the window after them. It was quite a quarter
      of an hour before I got my mouth free. When I did so, my screams
      brought the maid to my assistance. The other servants were soon
      alarmed, and we sent for the local police, who instantly
      communicated with London. That is really all that I can tell you,
      gentlemen, and I trust that it will not be necessary for me to go
      over so painful a story again.”

      “Any questions, Mr. Holmes?” asked Hopkins.

      “I will not impose any further tax upon Lady Brackenstall’s
      patience and time,” said Holmes. “Before I go into the
      dining-room, I should like to hear your experience.” He looked at
      the maid.

      “I saw the men before ever they came into the house,” said she.
      “As I sat by my bedroom window I saw three men in the moonlight
      down by the lodge gate yonder, but I thought nothing of it at the
      time. It was more than an hour after that I heard my mistress
      scream, and down I ran, to find her, poor lamb, just as she says,
      and him on the floor, with his blood and brains over the room. It
      was enough to drive a woman out of her wits, tied there, and her
      very dress spotted with him, but she never wanted courage, did
      Miss Mary Fraser of Adelaide and Lady Brackenstall of Abbey
      Grange hasn’t learned new ways. You’ve questioned her long
      enough, you gentlemen, and now she is coming to her own room,
      just with her old Theresa, to get the rest that she badly needs.”

      With a motherly tenderness the gaunt woman put her arm round her
      mistress and led her from the room.

      “She has been with her all her life,” said Hopkins. “Nursed her
      as a baby, and came with her to England when they first left
      Australia, eighteen months ago. Theresa Wright is her name, and
      the kind of maid you don’t pick up nowadays. This way, Mr.
      Holmes, if you please!”

      The keen interest had passed out of Holmes’s expressive face, and
      I knew that with the mystery all the charm of the case had
      departed. There still remained an arrest to be effected, but what
      were these commonplace rogues that he should soil his hands with
      them? An abstruse and learned specialist who finds that he has
      been called in for a case of measles would experience something
      of the annoyance which I read in my friend’s eyes. Yet the scene
      in the dining-room of the Abbey Grange was sufficiently strange
      to arrest his attention and to recall his waning interest.

      It was a very large and high chamber, with carved oak ceiling,
      oaken panelling, and a fine array of deer’s heads and ancient
      weapons around the walls. At the further end from the door was
      the high French window of which we had heard. Three smaller
      windows on the right-hand side filled the apartment with cold
      winter sunshine. On the left was a large, deep fireplace, with a
      massive, overhanging oak mantelpiece. Beside the fireplace was a
      heavy oaken chair with arms and cross-bars at the bottom. In and
      out through the open woodwork was woven a crimson cord, which was
      secured at each side to the crosspiece below. In releasing the
      lady, the cord had been slipped off her, but the knots with which
      it had been secured still remained. These details only struck our
      attention afterwards, for our thoughts were entirely absorbed by
      the terrible object which lay upon the tigerskin hearthrug in
      front of the fire.

      It was the body of a tall, well-made man, about forty years of
      age. He lay upon his back, his face upturned, with his white
      teeth grinning through his short, black beard. His two clenched
      hands were raised above his head, and a heavy, blackthorn stick
      lay across them. His dark, handsome, aquiline features were
      convulsed into a spasm of vindictive hatred, which had set his
      dead face in a terribly fiendish expression. He had evidently
      been in his bed when the alarm had broken out, for he wore a
      foppish, embroidered nightshirt, and his bare feet projected from
      his trousers. His head was horribly injured, and the whole room
      bore witness to the savage ferocity of the blow which had struck
      him down. Beside him lay the heavy poker, bent into a curve by
      the concussion. Holmes examined both it and the indescribable
      wreck which it had wrought.

      “He must be a powerful man, this elder Randall,” he remarked.

      “Yes,” said Hopkins. “I have some record of the fellow, and he is
      a rough customer.”

      “You should have no difficulty in getting him.”

      “Not the slightest. We have been on the look-out for him, and
      there was some idea that he had got away to America. Now that we
      know that the gang are here, I don’t see how they can escape. We
      have the news at every seaport already, and a reward will be
      offered before evening. What beats me is how they could have done
      so mad a thing, knowing that the lady could describe them and
      that we could not fail to recognize the description.”

      “Exactly. One would have expected that they would silence Lady
      Brackenstall as well.”

      “They may not have realized,” I suggested, “that she had
      recovered from her faint.”

      “That is likely enough. If she seemed to be senseless, they would
      not take her life. What about this poor fellow, Hopkins? I seem
      to have heard some queer stories about him.”

      “He was a good-hearted man when he was sober, but a perfect fiend
      when he was drunk, or rather when he was half drunk, for he
      seldom really went the whole way. The devil seemed to be in him
      at such times, and he was capable of anything. From what I hear,
      in spite of all his wealth and his title, he very nearly came our
      way once or twice. There was a scandal about his drenching a dog
      with petroleum and setting it on fire—her ladyship’s dog, to make
      the matter worse—and that was only hushed up with difficulty.
      Then he threw a decanter at that maid, Theresa Wright—there was
      trouble about that. On the whole, and between ourselves, it will
      be a brighter house without him. What are you looking at now?”

      Holmes was down on his knees, examining with great attention the
      knots upon the red cord with which the lady had been secured.
      Then he carefully scrutinized the broken and frayed end where it
      had snapped off when the burglar had dragged it down.

      “When this was pulled down, the bell in the kitchen must have
      rung loudly,” he remarked.

      “No one could hear it. The kitchen stands right at the back of
      the house.”

      “How did the burglar know no one would hear it? How dared he pull
      at a bell-rope in that reckless fashion?”

      “Exactly, Mr. Holmes, exactly. You put the very question which I
      have asked myself again and again. There can be no doubt that
      this fellow must have known the house and its habits. He must
      have perfectly understood that the servants would all be in bed
      at that comparatively early hour, and that no one could possibly
      hear a bell ring in the kitchen. Therefore, he must have been in
      close league with one of the servants. Surely that is evident.
      But there are eight servants, and all of good character.”

      “Other things being equal,” said Holmes, “one would suspect the
      one at whose head the master threw a decanter. And yet that would
      involve treachery towards the mistress to whom this woman seems
      devoted. Well, well, the point is a minor one, and when you have
      Randall you will probably find no difficulty in securing his
      accomplice. The lady’s story certainly seems to be corroborated,
      if it needed corroboration, by every detail which we see before
      us.” He walked to the French window and threw it open. “There are
      no signs here, but the ground is iron hard, and one would not
      expect them. I see that these candles in the mantelpiece have
      been lighted.”

      “Yes, it was by their light and that of the lady’s bedroom
      candle, that the burglars saw their way about.”

      “And what did they take?”

      “Well, they did not take much—only half a dozen articles of plate
      off the sideboard. Lady Brackenstall thinks that they were
      themselves so disturbed by the death of Sir Eustace that they did
      not ransack the house, as they would otherwise have done.”

      “No doubt that is true, and yet they drank some wine, I
      understand.”

      “To steady their nerves.”

      “Exactly. These three glasses upon the sideboard have been
      untouched, I suppose?”

      “Yes, and the bottle stands as they left it.”

      “Let us look at it. Halloa, halloa! What is this?”

      The three glasses were grouped together, all of them tinged with
      wine, and one of them containing some dregs of beeswing. The
      bottle stood near them, two-thirds full, and beside it lay a
      long, deeply stained cork. Its appearance and the dust upon the
      bottle showed that it was no common vintage which the murderers
      had enjoyed.

      A change had come over Holmes’s manner. He had lost his listless
      expression, and again I saw an alert light of interest in his
      keen, deep-set eyes. He raised the cork and examined it minutely.

      “How did they draw it?” he asked.

      Hopkins pointed to a half-opened drawer. In it lay some table
      linen and a large corkscrew.

      “Did Lady Brackenstall say that screw was used?”

      “No, you remember that she was senseless at the moment when the
      bottle was opened.”

      “Quite so. As a matter of fact, that screw was _not_ used. This
      bottle was opened by a pocket screw, probably contained in a
      knife, and not more than an inch and a half long. If you will
      examine the top of the cork, you will observe that the screw was
      driven in three times before the cork was extracted. It has never
      been transfixed. This long screw would have transfixed it and
      drawn it up with a single pull. When you catch this fellow, you
      will find that he has one of these multiplex knives in his
      possession.”

      “Excellent!” said Hopkins.

      “But these glasses do puzzle me, I confess. Lady Brackenstall
      actually _saw_ the three men drinking, did she not?”

      “Yes; she was clear about that.”

      “Then there is an end of it. What more is to be said? And yet,
      you must admit, that the three glasses are very remarkable,
      Hopkins. What? You see nothing remarkable? Well, well, let it
      pass. Perhaps, when a man has special knowledge and special
      powers like my own, it rather encourages him to seek a complex
      explanation when a simpler one is at hand. Of course, it must be
      a mere chance about the glasses. Well, good-morning, Hopkins. I
      don’t see that I can be of any use to you, and you appear to have
      your case very clear. You will let me know when Randall is
      arrested, and any further developments which may occur. I trust
      that I shall soon have to congratulate you upon a successful
      conclusion. Come, Watson, I fancy that we may employ ourselves
      more profitably at home.”

      During our return journey, I could see by Holmes’s face that he
      was much puzzled by something which he had observed. Every now
      and then, by an effort, he would throw off the impression, and
      talk as if the matter were clear, but then his doubts would
      settle down upon him again, and his knitted brows and abstracted
      eyes would show that his thoughts had gone back once more to the
      great dining-room of the Abbey Grange, in which this midnight
      tragedy had been enacted. At last, by a sudden impulse, just as
      our train was crawling out of a suburban station, he sprang on to
      the platform and pulled me out after him.

      “Excuse me, my dear fellow,” said he, as we watched the rear
      carriages of our train disappearing round a curve, “I am sorry to
      make you the victim of what may seem a mere whim, but on my life,
      Watson, I simply _can’t_ leave that case in this condition. Every
      instinct that I possess cries out against it. It’s wrong—it’s all
      wrong—I’ll swear that it’s wrong. And yet the lady’s story was
      complete, the maid’s corroboration was sufficient, the detail was
      fairly exact. What have I to put up against that? Three
      wine-glasses, that is all. But if I had not taken things for
      granted, if I had examined everything with the care which I
      should have shown had we approached the case _de novo_ and had no
      cut-and-dried story to warp my mind, should I not then have found
      something more definite to go upon? Of course I should. Sit down
      on this bench, Watson, until a train for Chiselhurst arrives, and
      allow me to lay the evidence before you, imploring you in the
      first instance to dismiss from your mind the idea that anything
      which the maid or her mistress may have said must necessarily be
      true. The lady’s charming personality must not be permitted to
      warp our judgment.

      “Surely there are details in her story which, if we looked at in
      cold blood, would excite our suspicion. These burglars made a
      considerable haul at Sydenham a fortnight ago. Some account of
      them and of their appearance was in the papers, and would
      naturally occur to anyone who wished to invent a story in which
      imaginary robbers should play a part. As a matter of fact,
      burglars who have done a good stroke of business are, as a rule,
      only too glad to enjoy the proceeds in peace and quiet without
      embarking on another perilous undertaking. Again, it is unusual
      for burglars to operate at so early an hour, it is unusual for
      burglars to strike a lady to prevent her screaming, since one
      would imagine that was the sure way to make her scream, it is
      unusual for them to commit murder when their numbers are
      sufficient to overpower one man, it is unusual for them to be
      content with a limited plunder when there was much more within
      their reach, and finally, I should say, that it was very unusual
      for such men to leave a bottle half empty. How do all these
      unusuals strike you, Watson?”

      “Their cumulative effect is certainly considerable, and yet each
      of them is quite possible in itself. The most unusual thing of
      all, as it seems to me, is that the lady should be tied to the
      chair.”

      “Well, I am not so clear about that, Watson, for it is evident
      that they must either kill her or else secure her in such a way
      that she could not give immediate notice of their escape. But at
      any rate I have shown, have I not, that there is a certain
      element of improbability about the lady’s story? And now, on the
      top of this, comes the incident of the wineglasses.”

      “What about the wineglasses?”

      “Can you see them in your mind’s eye?”

      “I see them clearly.”

      “We are told that three men drank from them. Does that strike you
      as likely?”

      “Why not? There was wine in each glass.”

      “Exactly, but there was beeswing only in one glass. You must have
      noticed that fact. What does that suggest to your mind?”

      “The last glass filled would be most likely to contain beeswing.”

      “Not at all. The bottle was full of it, and it is inconceivable
      that the first two glasses were clear and the third heavily
      charged with it. There are two possible explanations, and only
      two. One is that after the second glass was filled the bottle was
      violently agitated, and so the third glass received the beeswing.
      That does not appear probable. No, no, I am sure that I am
      right.”

      “What, then, do you suppose?”

      “That only two glasses were used, and that the dregs of both were
      poured into a third glass, so as to give the false impression
      that three people had been here. In that way all the beeswing
      would be in the last glass, would it not? Yes, I am convinced
      that this is so. But if I have hit upon the true explanation of
      this one small phenomenon, then in an instant the case rises from
      the commonplace to the exceedingly remarkable, for it can only
      mean that Lady Brackenstall and her maid have deliberately lied
      to us, that not one word of their story is to be believed, that
      they have some very strong reason for covering the real criminal,
      and that we must construct our case for ourselves without any
      help from them. That is the mission which now lies before us, and
      here, Watson, is the Sydenham train.”

      The household at the Abbey Grange were much surprised at our
      return, but Sherlock Holmes, finding that Stanley Hopkins had
      gone off to report to headquarters, took possession of the
      dining-room, locked the door upon the inside, and devoted himself
      for two hours to one of those minute and laborious investigations
      which form the solid basis on which his brilliant edifices of
      deduction were reared. Seated in a corner like an interested
      student who observes the demonstration of his professor, I
      followed every step of that remarkable research. The window, the
      curtains, the carpet, the chair, the rope—each in turn was
      minutely examined and duly pondered. The body of the unfortunate
      baronet had been removed, and all else remained as we had seen it
      in the morning. Finally, to my astonishment, Holmes climbed up on
      to the massive mantelpiece. Far above his head hung the few
      inches of red cord which were still attached to the wire. For a
      long time he gazed upward at it, and then in an attempt to get
      nearer to it he rested his knee upon a wooden bracket on the
      wall. This brought his hand within a few inches of the broken end
      of the rope, but it was not this so much as the bracket itself
      which seemed to engage his attention. Finally, he sprang down
      with an ejaculation of satisfaction.

      “It’s all right, Watson,” said he. “We have got our case—one of
      the most remarkable in our collection. But, dear me, how
      slow-witted I have been, and how nearly I have committed the
      blunder of my lifetime! Now, I think that, with a few missing
      links, my chain is almost complete.”

      “You have got your men?”

      “Man, Watson, man. Only one, but a very formidable person. Strong
      as a lion—witness the blow that bent that poker! Six foot three
      in height, active as a squirrel, dexterous with his fingers,
      finally, remarkably quick-witted, for this whole ingenious story
      is of his concoction. Yes, Watson, we have come upon the
      handiwork of a very remarkable individual. And yet, in that
      bell-rope, he has given us a clue which should not have left us a
      doubt.”

      “Where was the clue?”

      “Well, if you were to pull down a bell-rope, Watson, where would
      you expect it to break? Surely at the spot where it is attached
      to the wire. Why should it break three inches from the top, as
      this one has done?”

      “Because it is frayed there?”

      “Exactly. This end, which we can examine, is frayed. He was
      cunning enough to do that with his knife. But the other end is
      not frayed. You could not observe that from here, but if you were
      on the mantelpiece you would see that it is cut clean off without
      any mark of fraying whatever. You can reconstruct what occurred.
      The man needed the rope. He would not tear it down for fear of
      giving the alarm by ringing the bell. What did he do? He sprang
      up on the mantelpiece, could not quite reach it, put his knee on
      the bracket—you will see the impression in the dust—and so got
      his knife to bear upon the cord. I could not reach the place by
      at least three inches—from which I infer that he is at least
      three inches a bigger man than I. Look at that mark upon the seat
      of the oaken chair! What is it?”

      “Blood.”

      “Undoubtedly it is blood. This alone puts the lady’s story out of
      court. If she were seated on the chair when the crime was done,
      how comes that mark? No, no, she was placed in the chair _after_
      the death of her husband. I’ll wager that the black dress shows a
      corresponding mark to this. We have not yet met our Waterloo,
      Watson, but this is our Marengo, for it begins in defeat and ends
      in victory. I should like now to have a few words with the nurse,
      Theresa. We must be wary for a while, if we are to get the
      information which we want.”

      She was an interesting person, this stern Australian
      nurse—taciturn, suspicious, ungracious, it took some time before
      Holmes’s pleasant manner and frank acceptance of all that she
      said thawed her into a corresponding amiability. She did not
      attempt to conceal her hatred for her late employer.

      “Yes, sir, it is true that he threw the decanter at me. I heard
      him call my mistress a name, and I told him that he would not
      dare to speak so if her brother had been there. Then it was that
      he threw it at me. He might have thrown a dozen if he had but
      left my bonny bird alone. He was forever ill-treating her, and
      she too proud to complain. She will not even tell me all that he
      has done to her. She never told me of those marks on her arm that
      you saw this morning, but I know very well that they come from a
      stab with a hatpin. The sly devil—God forgive me that I should
      speak of him so, now that he is dead! But a devil he was, if ever
      one walked the earth. He was all honey when first we met him—only
      eighteen months ago, and we both feel as if it were eighteen
      years. She had only just arrived in London. Yes, it was her first
      voyage—she had never been from home before. He won her with his
      title and his money and his false London ways. If she made a
      mistake she has paid for it, if ever a woman did. What month did
      we meet him? Well, I tell you it was just after we arrived. We
      arrived in June, and it was July. They were married in January of
      last year. Yes, she is down in the morning-room again, and I have
      no doubt she will see you, but you must not ask too much of her,
      for she has gone through all that flesh and blood will stand.”

      Lady Brackenstall was reclining on the same couch, but looked
      brighter than before. The maid had entered with us, and began
      once more to foment the bruise upon her mistress’s brow.

      “I hope,” said the lady, “that you have not come to cross-examine
      me again?”

      “No,” Holmes answered, in his gentlest voice, “I will not cause
      you any unnecessary trouble, Lady Brackenstall, and my whole
      desire is to make things easy for you, for I am convinced that
      you are a much-tried woman. If you will treat me as a friend and
      trust me, you may find that I will justify your trust.”

      “What do you want me to do?”

      “To tell me the truth.”

      “Mr. Holmes!”

      “No, no, Lady Brackenstall—it is no use. You may have heard of
      any little reputation which I possess. I will stake it all on the
      fact that your story is an absolute fabrication.”

      Mistress and maid were both staring at Holmes with pale faces and
      frightened eyes.

      “You are an impudent fellow!” cried Theresa. “Do you mean to say
      that my mistress has told a lie?”

      Holmes rose from his chair.

      “Have you nothing to tell me?”

      “I have told you everything.”

      “Think once more, Lady Brackenstall. Would it not be better to be
      frank?”

      For an instant there was hesitation in her beautiful face. Then
      some new strong thought caused it to set like a mask.

      “I have told you all I know.”

      Holmes took his hat and shrugged his shoulders. “I am sorry,” he
      said, and without another word we left the room and the house.
      There was a pond in the park, and to this my friend led the way.
      It was frozen over, but a single hole was left for the
      convenience of a solitary swan. Holmes gazed at it, and then
      passed on to the lodge gate. There he scribbled a short note for
      Stanley Hopkins, and left it with the lodge-keeper.

      “It may be a hit, or it may be a miss, but we are bound to do
      something for friend Hopkins, just to justify this second visit,”
      said he. “I will not quite take him into my confidence yet. I
      think our next scene of operations must be the shipping office of
      the Adelaide-Southampton line, which stands at the end of Pall
      Mall, if I remember right. There is a second line of steamers
      which connect South Australia with England, but we will draw the
      larger cover first.”

      Holmes’s card sent in to the manager ensured instant attention,
      and he was not long in acquiring all the information he needed.
      In June of ’95, only one of their line had reached a home port.
      It was the _Rock of Gibraltar_, their largest and best boat. A
      reference to the passenger list showed that Miss Fraser, of
      Adelaide, with her maid had made the voyage in her. The boat was
      now somewhere south of the Suez Canal on her way to Australia.
      Her officers were the same as in ’95, with one exception. The
      first officer, Mr. Jack Crocker, had been made a captain and was
      to take charge of their new ship, the _Bass Rock_, sailing in two
      days’ time from Southampton. He lived at Sydenham, but he was
      likely to be in that morning for instructions, if we cared to
      wait for him.

      No, Mr. Holmes had no desire to see him, but would be glad to
      know more about his record and character.

      His record was magnificent. There was not an officer in the fleet
      to touch him. As to his character, he was reliable on duty, but a
      wild, desperate fellow off the deck of his ship—hot-headed,
      excitable, but loyal, honest, and kind-hearted. That was the pith
      of the information with which Holmes left the office of the
      Adelaide-Southampton company. Thence he drove to Scotland Yard,
      but, instead of entering, he sat in his cab with his brows drawn
      down, lost in profound thought. Finally he drove round to the
      Charing Cross telegraph office, sent off a message, and then, at
      last, we made for Baker Street once more.

      “No, I couldn’t do it, Watson,” said he, as we reentered our
      room. “Once that warrant was made out, nothing on earth would
      save him. Once or twice in my career I feel that I have done more
      real harm by my discovery of the criminal than ever he had done
      by his crime. I have learned caution now, and I had rather play
      tricks with the law of England than with my own conscience. Let
      us know a little more before we act.”

      Before evening, we had a visit from Inspector Stanley Hopkins.
      Things were not going very well with him.

      “I believe that you are a wizard, Mr. Holmes. I really do
      sometimes think that you have powers that are not human. Now, how
      on earth could you know that the stolen silver was at the bottom
      of that pond?”

      “I didn’t know it.”

      “But you told me to examine it.”

      “You got it, then?”

      “Yes, I got it.”

      “I am very glad if I have helped you.”

      “But you haven’t helped me. You have made the affair far more
      difficult. What sort of burglars are they who steal silver and
      then throw it into the nearest pond?”

      “It was certainly rather eccentric behaviour. I was merely going
      on the idea that if the silver had been taken by persons who did
      not want it—who merely took it for a blind, as it were—then they
      would naturally be anxious to get rid of it.”

      “But why should such an idea cross your mind?”

      “Well, I thought it was possible. When they came out through the
      French window, there was the pond with one tempting little hole
      in the ice, right in front of their noses. Could there be a
      better hiding-place?”

      “Ah, a hiding-place—that is better!” cried Stanley Hopkins. “Yes,
      yes, I see it all now! It was early, there were folk upon the
      roads, they were afraid of being seen with the silver, so they
      sank it in the pond, intending to return for it when the coast
      was clear. Excellent, Mr. Holmes—that is better than your idea of
      a blind.”

      “Quite so, you have got an admirable theory. I have no doubt that
      my own ideas were quite wild, but you must admit that they have
      ended in discovering the silver.”

      “Yes, sir—yes. It was all your doing. But I have had a bad
      setback.”

      “A setback?”

      “Yes, Mr. Holmes. The Randall gang were arrested in New York this
      morning.”

      “Dear me, Hopkins! That is certainly rather against your theory
      that they committed a murder in Kent last night.”

      “It is fatal, Mr. Holmes—absolutely fatal. Still, there are other
      gangs of three besides the Randalls, or it may be some new gang
      of which the police have never heard.”

      “Quite so, it is perfectly possible. What, are you off?”

      “Yes, Mr. Holmes, there is no rest for me until I have got to the
      bottom of the business. I suppose you have no hint to give me?”

      “I have given you one.”

      “Which?”

      “Well, I suggested a blind.”

      “But why, Mr. Holmes, why?”

      “Ah, that’s the question, of course. But I commend the idea to
      your mind. You might possibly find that there was something in
      it. You won’t stop for dinner? Well, good-bye, and let us know
      how you get on.”

      Dinner was over, and the table cleared before Holmes alluded to
      the matter again. He had lit his pipe and held his slippered feet
      to the cheerful blaze of the fire. Suddenly he looked at his
      watch.

      “I expect developments, Watson.”

      “When?”

      “Now—within a few minutes. I dare say you thought I acted rather
      badly to Stanley Hopkins just now?”

      “I trust your judgment.”

      “A very sensible reply, Watson. You must look at it this way:
      what I know is unofficial, what he knows is official. I have the
      right to private judgment, but he has none. He must disclose all,
      or he is a traitor to his service. In a doubtful case I would not
      put him in so painful a position, and so I reserve my information
      until my own mind is clear upon the matter.”

      “But when will that be?”

      “The time has come. You will now be present at the last scene of
      a remarkable little drama.”

      There was a sound upon the stairs, and our door was opened to
      admit as fine a specimen of manhood as ever passed through it. He
      was a very tall young man, golden-moustached, blue-eyed, with a
      skin which had been burned by tropical suns, and a springy step,
      which showed that the huge frame was as active as it was strong.
      He closed the door behind him, and then he stood with clenched
      hands and heaving breast, choking down some overmastering
      emotion.

      “Sit down, Captain Crocker. You got my telegram?”

      Our visitor sank into an armchair and looked from one to the
      other of us with questioning eyes.

      “I got your telegram, and I came at the hour you said. I heard
      that you had been down to the office. There was no getting away
      from you. Let’s hear the worst. What are you going to do with me?
      Arrest me? Speak out, man! You can’t sit there and play with me
      like a cat with a mouse.”

      “Give him a cigar,” said Holmes. “Bite on that, Captain Crocker,
      and don’t let your nerves run away with you. I should not sit
      here smoking with you if I thought that you were a common
      criminal, you may be sure of that. Be frank with me and we may do
      some good. Play tricks with me, and I’ll crush you.”

      “What do you wish me to do?”

      “To give me a true account of all that happened at the Abbey
      Grange last night—a _true_ account, mind you, with nothing added
      and nothing taken off. I know so much already that if you go one
      inch off the straight, I’ll blow this police whistle from my
      window and the affair goes out of my hands forever.”

      The sailor thought for a little. Then he struck his leg with his
      great sunburned hand.

      “I’ll chance it,” he cried. “I believe you are a man of your
      word, and a white man, and I’ll tell you the whole story. But one
      thing I will say first. So far as I am concerned, I regret
      nothing and I fear nothing, and I would do it all again and be
      proud of the job. Damn the beast, if he had as many lives as a
      cat, he would owe them all to me! But it’s the lady, Mary—Mary
      Fraser—for never will I call her by that accursed name. When I
      think of getting her into trouble, I who would give my life just
      to bring one smile to her dear face, it’s that that turns my soul
      into water. And yet—and yet—what less could I do? I’ll tell you
      my story, gentlemen, and then I’ll ask you, as man to man, what
      less could I do?

      “I must go back a bit. You seem to know everything, so I expect
      that you know that I met her when she was a passenger and I was
      first officer of the _Rock of Gibraltar_. From the first day I
      met her, she was the only woman to me. Every day of that voyage I
      loved her more, and many a time since have I kneeled down in the
      darkness of the night watch and kissed the deck of that ship
      because I knew her dear feet had trod it. She was never engaged
      to me. She treated me as fairly as ever a woman treated a man. I
      have no complaint to make. It was all love on my side, and all
      good comradeship and friendship on hers. When we parted she was a
      free woman, but I could never again be a free man.

      “Next time I came back from sea, I heard of her marriage. Well,
      why shouldn’t she marry whom she liked? Title and money—who could
      carry them better than she? She was born for all that is
      beautiful and dainty. I didn’t grieve over her marriage. I was
      not such a selfish hound as that. I just rejoiced that good luck
      had come her way, and that she had not thrown herself away on a
      penniless sailor. That’s how I loved Mary Fraser.

      “Well, I never thought to see her again, but last voyage I was
      promoted, and the new boat was not yet launched, so I had to wait
      for a couple of months with my people at Sydenham. One day out in
      a country lane I met Theresa Wright, her old maid. She told me
      all about her, about him, about everything. I tell you,
      gentlemen, it nearly drove me mad. This drunken hound, that he
      should dare to raise his hand to her, whose boots he was not
      worthy to lick! I met Theresa again. Then I met Mary herself—and
      met her again. Then she would meet me no more. But the other day
      I had a notice that I was to start on my voyage within a week,
      and I determined that I would see her once before I left. Theresa
      was always my friend, for she loved Mary and hated this villain
      almost as much as I did. From her I learned the ways of the
      house. Mary used to sit up reading in her own little room
      downstairs. I crept round there last night and scratched at the
      window. At first she would not open to me, but in her heart I
      know that now she loves me, and she could not leave me in the
      frosty night. She whispered to me to come round to the big front
      window, and I found it open before me, so as to let me into the
      dining-room. Again I heard from her own lips things that made my
      blood boil, and again I cursed this brute who mishandled the
      woman I loved. Well, gentlemen, I was standing with her just
      inside the window, in all innocence, as God is my judge, when he
      rushed like a madman into the room, called her the vilest name
      that a man could use to a woman, and welted her across the face
      with the stick he had in his hand. I had sprung for the poker,
      and it was a fair fight between us. See here, on my arm, where
      his first blow fell. Then it was my turn, and I went through him
      as if he had been a rotten pumpkin. Do you think I was sorry? Not
      I! It was his life or mine, but far more than that, it was his
      life or hers, for how could I leave her in the power of this
      madman? That was how I killed him. Was I wrong? Well, then, what
      would either of you gentlemen have done, if you had been in my
      position?

      “She had screamed when he struck her, and that brought old
      Theresa down from the room above. There was a bottle of wine on
      the sideboard, and I opened it and poured a little between Mary’s
      lips, for she was half dead with shock. Then I took a drop
      myself. Theresa was as cool as ice, and it was her plot as much
      as mine. We must make it appear that burglars had done the thing.
      Theresa kept on repeating our story to her mistress, while I
      swarmed up and cut the rope of the bell. Then I lashed her in her
      chair, and frayed out the end of the rope to make it look
      natural, else they would wonder how in the world a burglar could
      have got up there to cut it. Then I gathered up a few plates and
      pots of silver, to carry out the idea of the robbery, and there I
      left them, with orders to give the alarm when I had a quarter of
      an hour’s start. I dropped the silver into the pond, and made off
      for Sydenham, feeling that for once in my life I had done a real
      good night’s work. And that’s the truth and the whole truth, Mr.
      Holmes, if it costs me my neck.”

      Holmes smoked for some time in silence. Then he crossed the room,
      and shook our visitor by the hand.

      “That’s what I think,” said he. “I know that every word is true,
      for you have hardly said a word which I did not know. No one but
      an acrobat or a sailor could have got up to that bell-rope from
      the bracket, and no one but a sailor could have made the knots
      with which the cord was fastened to the chair. Only once had this
      lady been brought into contact with sailors, and that was on her
      voyage, and it was someone of her own class of life, since she
      was trying hard to shield him, and so showing that she loved him.
      You see how easy it was for me to lay my hands upon you when once
      I had started upon the right trail.”

      “I thought the police never could have seen through our dodge.”

      “And the police haven’t, nor will they, to the best of my belief.
      Now, look here, Captain Crocker, this is a very serious matter,
      though I am willing to admit that you acted under the most
      extreme provocation to which any man could be subjected. I am not
      sure that in defence of your own life your action will not be
      pronounced legitimate. However, that is for a British jury to
      decide. Meanwhile I have so much sympathy for you that, if you
      choose to disappear in the next twenty-four hours, I will promise
      you that no one will hinder you.”

      “And then it will all come out?”

      “Certainly it will come out.”

      The sailor flushed with anger.

      “What sort of proposal is that to make a man? I know enough of
      law to understand that Mary would be held as accomplice. Do you
      think I would leave her alone to face the music while I slunk
      away? No, sir, let them do their worst upon me, but for heaven’s
      sake, Mr. Holmes, find some way of keeping my poor Mary out of
      the courts.”

      Holmes for a second time held out his hand to the sailor.

      “I was only testing you, and you ring true every time. Well, it
      is a great responsibility that I take upon myself, but I have
      given Hopkins an excellent hint and if he can’t avail himself of
      it I can do no more. See here, Captain Crocker, we’ll do this in
      due form of law. You are the prisoner. Watson, you are a British
      jury, and I never met a man who was more eminently fitted to
      represent one. I am the judge. Now, gentleman of the jury, you
      have heard the evidence. Do you find the prisoner guilty or not
      guilty?”

      “Not guilty, my lord,” said I.

      “_Vox populi, vox Dei_. You are acquitted, Captain Crocker. So
      long as the law does not find some other victim you are safe from
      me. Come back to this lady in a year, and may her future and
      yours justify us in the judgment which we have pronounced this
      night!”




THE ADVENTURE OF THE SECOND STAIN


      I had intended “The Adventure of the Abbey Grange” to be the last
      of those exploits of my friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, which I
      should ever communicate to the public. This resolution of mine
      was not due to any lack of material, since I have notes of many
      hundreds of cases to which I have never alluded, nor was it
      caused by any waning interest on the part of my readers in the
      singular personality and unique methods of this remarkable man.
      The real reason lay in the reluctance which Mr. Holmes has shown
      to the continued publication of his experiences. So long as he
      was in actual professional practice the records of his successes
      were of some practical value to him, but since he has definitely
      retired from London and betaken himself to study and bee-farming
      on the Sussex Downs, notoriety has become hateful to him, and he
      has peremptorily requested that his wishes in this matter should
      be strictly observed. It was only upon my representing to him
      that I had given a promise that “The Adventure of the Second
      Stain” should be published when the times were ripe, and pointing
      out to him that it is only appropriate that this long series of
      episodes should culminate in the most important international
      case which he has ever been called upon to handle, that I at last
      succeeded in obtaining his consent that a carefully guarded
      account of the incident should at last be laid before the public.
      If in telling the story I seem to be somewhat vague in certain
      details, the public will readily understand that there is an
      excellent reason for my reticence.

      It was, then, in a year, and even in a decade, that shall be
      nameless, that upon one Tuesday morning in autumn we found two
      visitors of European fame within the walls of our humble room in
      Baker Street. The one, austere, high-nosed, eagle-eyed, and
      dominant, was none other than the illustrious Lord Bellinger,
      twice Premier of Britain. The other, dark, clear-cut, and
      elegant, hardly yet of middle age, and endowed with every beauty
      of body and of mind, was the Right Honourable Trelawney Hope,
      Secretary for European Affairs, and the most rising statesman in
      the country. They sat side by side upon our paper-littered
      settee, and it was easy to see from their worn and anxious faces
      that it was business of the most pressing importance which had
      brought them. The Premier’s thin, blue-veined hands were clasped
      tightly over the ivory head of his umbrella, and his gaunt,
      ascetic face looked gloomily from Holmes to me. The European
      Secretary pulled nervously at his moustache and fidgeted with the
      seals of his watch-chain.

      “When I discovered my loss, Mr. Holmes, which was at eight
      o’clock this morning, I at once informed the Prime Minister. It
      was at his suggestion that we have both come to you.”

      “Have you informed the police?”

      “No, sir,” said the Prime Minister, with the quick, decisive
      manner for which he was famous. “We have not done so, nor is it
      possible that we should do so. To inform the police must, in the
      long run, mean to inform the public. This is what we particularly
      desire to avoid.”

      “And why, sir?”

      “Because the document in question is of such immense importance
      that its publication might very easily—I might almost say
      probably—lead to European complications of the utmost moment. It
      is not too much to say that peace or war may hang upon the issue.
      Unless its recovery can be attended with the utmost secrecy, then
      it may as well not be recovered at all, for all that is aimed at
      by those who have taken it is that its contents should be
      generally known.”

      “I understand. Now, Mr. Trelawney Hope, I should be much obliged
      if you would tell me exactly the circumstances under which this
      document disappeared.”

      “That can be done in a very few words, Mr. Holmes. The letter—for
      it was a letter from a foreign potentate—was received six days
      ago. It was of such importance that I have never left it in my
      safe, but have taken it across each evening to my house in
      Whitehall Terrace, and kept it in my bedroom in a locked
      despatch-box. It was there last night. Of that I am certain. I
      actually opened the box while I was dressing for dinner and saw
      the document inside. This morning it was gone. The despatch-box
      had stood beside the glass upon my dressing-table all night. I am
      a light sleeper, and so is my wife. We are both prepared to swear
      that no one could have entered the room during the night. And yet
      I repeat that the paper is gone.”

      “What time did you dine?”

      “Half-past seven.”

      “How long was it before you went to bed?”

      “My wife had gone to the theatre. I waited up for her. It was
      half-past eleven before we went to our room.”

      “Then for four hours the despatch-box had lain unguarded?”

      “No one is ever permitted to enter that room save the house-maid
      in the morning, and my valet, or my wife’s maid, during the rest
      of the day. They are both trusty servants who have been with us
      for some time. Besides, neither of them could possibly have known
      that there was anything more valuable than the ordinary
      departmental papers in my despatch-box.”

      “Who did know of the existence of that letter?”

      “No one in the house.”

      “Surely your wife knew?”

      “No, sir. I had said nothing to my wife until I missed the paper
      this morning.”

      The Premier nodded approvingly.

      “I have long known, sir, how high is your sense of public duty,”
      said he. “I am convinced that in the case of a secret of this
      importance it would rise superior to the most intimate domestic
      ties.”

      The European Secretary bowed.

      “You do me no more than justice, sir. Until this morning I have
      never breathed one word to my wife upon this matter.”

      “Could she have guessed?”

      “No, Mr. Holmes, she could not have guessed—nor could anyone have
      guessed.”

      “Have you lost any documents before?”

      “No, sir.”

      “Who is there in England who did know of the existence of this
      letter?”

      “Each member of the Cabinet was informed of it yesterday, but the
      pledge of secrecy which attends every Cabinet meeting was
      increased by the solemn warning which was given by the Prime
      Minister. Good heavens, to think that within a few hours I should
      myself have lost it!” His handsome face was distorted with a
      spasm of despair, and his hands tore at his hair. For a moment we
      caught a glimpse of the natural man, impulsive, ardent, keenly
      sensitive. The next the aristocratic mask was replaced, and the
      gentle voice had returned. “Besides the members of the Cabinet
      there are two, or possibly three, departmental officials who know
      of the letter. No one else in England, Mr. Holmes, I assure you.”

      “But abroad?”

      “I believe that no one abroad has seen it save the man who wrote
      it. I am well convinced that his Ministers—that the usual
      official channels have not been employed.”

      Holmes considered for some little time.

      “Now, sir, I must ask you more particularly what this document
      is, and why its disappearance should have such momentous
      consequences?”

      The two statesmen exchanged a quick glance and the Premier’s
      shaggy eyebrows gathered in a frown.

      “Mr. Holmes, the envelope is a long, thin one of pale blue
      colour. There is a seal of red wax stamped with a crouching lion.
      It is addressed in large, bold handwriting to——”

      “I fear, sir,” said Holmes, “that, interesting and indeed
      essential as these details are, my inquiries must go more to the
      root of things. What _was_ the letter?”

      “That is a State secret of the utmost importance, and I fear that
      I cannot tell you, nor do I see that it is necessary. If by the
      aid of the powers which you are said to possess you can find such
      an envelope as I describe with its enclosure, you will have
      deserved well of your country, and earned any reward which it
      lies in our power to bestow.”

      Sherlock Holmes rose with a smile.

      “You are two of the most busy men in the country,” said he, “and
      in my own small way I have also a good many calls upon me. I
      regret exceedingly that I cannot help you in this matter, and any
      continuation of this interview would be a waste of time.”

      The Premier sprang to his feet with that quick, fierce gleam of
      his deep-set eyes before which a Cabinet has cowered. “I am not
      accustomed, sir,” he began, but mastered his anger and resumed
      his seat. For a minute or more we all sat in silence. Then the
      old statesman shrugged his shoulders.

      “We must accept your terms, Mr. Holmes. No doubt you are right,
      and it is unreasonable for us to expect you to act unless we give
      you our entire confidence.”

      “I agree with you,” said the younger statesman.

      “Then I will tell you, relying entirely upon your honour and that
      of your colleague, Dr. Watson. I may appeal to your patriotism
      also, for I could not imagine a greater misfortune for the
      country than that this affair should come out.”

      “You may safely trust us.”

      “The letter, then, is from a certain foreign potentate who has
      been ruffled by some recent Colonial developments of this
      country. It has been written hurriedly and upon his own
      responsibility entirely. Inquiries have shown that his Ministers
      know nothing of the matter. At the same time it is couched in so
      unfortunate a manner, and certain phrases in it are of so
      provocative a character, that its publication would undoubtedly
      lead to a most dangerous state of feeling in this country. There
      would be such a ferment, sir, that I do not hesitate to say that
      within a week of the publication of that letter this country
      would be involved in a great war.”

      Holmes wrote a name upon a slip of paper and handed it to the
      Premier.

      “Exactly. It was he. And it is this letter—this letter which may
      well mean the expenditure of a thousand millions and the lives of
      a hundred thousand men—which has become lost in this
      unaccountable fashion.”

      “Have you informed the sender?”

      “Yes, sir, a cipher telegram has been despatched.”

      “Perhaps he desires the publication of the letter.”

      “No, sir, we have strong reason to believe that he already
      understands that he has acted in an indiscreet and hot-headed
      manner. It would be a greater blow to him and to his country than
      to us if this letter were to come out.”

      “If this is so, whose interest is it that the letter should come
      out? Why should anyone desire to steal it or to publish it?”

      “There, Mr. Holmes, you take me into regions of high
      international politics. But if you consider the European
      situation you will have no difficulty in perceiving the motive.
      The whole of Europe is an armed camp. There is a double league
      which makes a fair balance of military power. Great Britain holds
      the scales. If Britain were driven into war with one confederacy,
      it would assure the supremacy of the other confederacy, whether
      they joined in the war or not. Do you follow?”

      “Very clearly. It is then the interest of the enemies of this
      potentate to secure and publish this letter, so as to make a
      breach between his country and ours?”

      “Yes, sir.”

      “And to whom would this document be sent if it fell into the
      hands of an enemy?”

      “To any of the great Chancelleries of Europe. It is probably
      speeding on its way thither at the present instant as fast as
      steam can take it.”

      Mr. Trelawney Hope dropped his head on his chest and groaned
      aloud. The Premier placed his hand kindly upon his shoulder.

      “It is your misfortune, my dear fellow. No one can blame you.
      There is no precaution which you have neglected. Now, Mr. Holmes,
      you are in full possession of the facts. What course do you
      recommend?”

      Holmes shook his head mournfully.

      “You think, sir, that unless this document is recovered there
      will be war?”

      “I think it is very probable.”

      “Then, sir, prepare for war.”

      “That is a hard saying, Mr. Holmes.”

      “Consider the facts, sir. It is inconceivable that it was taken
      after eleven-thirty at night, since I understand that Mr. Hope
      and his wife were both in the room from that hour until the loss
      was found out. It was taken, then, yesterday evening between
      seven-thirty and eleven-thirty, probably near the earlier hour,
      since whoever took it evidently knew that it was there and would
      naturally secure it as early as possible. Now, sir, if a document
      of this importance were taken at that hour, where can it be now?
      No one has any reason to retain it. It has been passed rapidly on
      to those who need it. What chance have we now to overtake or even
      to trace it? It is beyond our reach.”

      The Prime Minister rose from the settee.

      “What you say is perfectly logical, Mr. Holmes. I feel that the
      matter is indeed out of our hands.”

      “Let us presume, for argument’s sake, that the document was taken
      by the maid or by the valet——”

      “They are both old and tried servants.”

      “I understand you to say that your room is on the second floor,
      that there is no entrance from without, and that from within no
      one could go up unobserved. It must, then, be somebody in the
      house who has taken it. To whom would the thief take it? To one
      of several international spies and secret agents, whose names are
      tolerably familiar to me. There are three who may be said to be
      the heads of their profession. I will begin my research by going
      round and finding if each of them is at his post. If one is
      missing—especially if he has disappeared since last night—we will
      have some indication as to where the document has gone.”

      “Why should he be missing?” asked the European Secretary. “He
      would take the letter to an Embassy in London, as likely as not.”

      “I fancy not. These agents work independently, and their
      relations with the Embassies are often strained.”

      The Prime Minister nodded his acquiescence.

      “I believe you are right, Mr. Holmes. He would take so valuable a
      prize to headquarters with his own hands. I think that your
      course of action is an excellent one. Meanwhile, Hope, we cannot
      neglect all our other duties on account of this one misfortune.
      Should there be any fresh developments during the day we shall
      communicate with you, and you will no doubt let us know the
      results of your own inquiries.”

      The two statesmen bowed and walked gravely from the room.

      When our illustrious visitors had departed Holmes lit his pipe in
      silence and sat for some time lost in the deepest thought. I had
      opened the morning paper and was immersed in a sensational crime
      which had occurred in London the night before, when my friend
      gave an exclamation, sprang to his feet, and laid his pipe down
      upon the mantelpiece.

      “Yes,” said he, “there is no better way of approaching it. The
      situation is desperate, but not hopeless. Even now, if we could
      be sure which of them has taken it, it is just possible that it
      has not yet passed out of his hands. After all, it is a question
      of money with these fellows, and I have the British treasury
      behind me. If it’s on the market I’ll buy it—if it means another
      penny on the income-tax. It is conceivable that the fellow might
      hold it back to see what bids come from this side before he tries
      his luck on the other. There are only those three capable of
      playing so bold a game—there are Oberstein, La Rothiere, and
      Eduardo Lucas. I will see each of them.”

      I glanced at my morning paper.

      “Is that Eduardo Lucas of Godolphin Street?”

      “Yes.”

      “You will not see him.”

      “Why not?”

      “He was murdered in his house last night.”

      My friend has so often astonished me in the course of our
      adventures that it was with a sense of exultation that I realized
      how completely I had astonished him. He stared in amazement, and
      then snatched the paper from my hands. This was the paragraph
      which I had been engaged in reading when he rose from his chair:

      MURDER IN WESTMINSTER

      A crime of mysterious character was committed last night at 16,
      Godolphin Street, one of the old-fashioned and secluded rows of
      eighteenth century houses which lie between the river and the
      Abbey, almost in the shadow of the great Tower of the Houses of
      Parliament. This small but select mansion has been inhabited for
      some years by Mr. Eduardo Lucas, well-known in society circles
      both on account of his charming personality and because he has
      the well-deserved reputation of being one of the best amateur
      tenors in the country. Mr. Lucas is an unmarried man, thirty-four
      years of age, and his establishment consists of Mrs. Pringle, an
      elderly housekeeper, and of Mitton, his valet. The former retires
      early and sleeps at the top of the house. The valet was out for
      the evening, visiting a friend at Hammersmith. From ten o’clock
      onward Mr. Lucas had the house to himself. What occurred during
      that time has not yet transpired, but at a quarter to twelve
      Police-constable Barrett, passing along Godolphin Street observed
      that the door of No. 16 was ajar. He knocked, but received no
      answer. Perceiving a light in the front room, he advanced into
      the passage and again knocked, but without reply. He then pushed
      open the door and entered. The room was in a state of wild
      disorder, the furniture being all swept to one side, and one
      chair lying on its back in the centre. Beside this chair, and
      still grasping one of its legs, lay the unfortunate tenant of the
      house. He had been stabbed to the heart and must have died
      instantly. The knife with which the crime had been committed was
      a curved Indian dagger, plucked down from a trophy of Oriental
      arms which adorned one of the walls. Robbery does not appear to
      have been the motive of the crime, for there had been no attempt
      to remove the valuable contents of the room. Mr. Eduardo Lucas
      was so well-known and popular that his violent and mysterious
      fate will arouse painful interest and intense sympathy in a
      widespread circle of friends.

      “Well, Watson, what do you make of this?” asked Holmes, after a
      long pause.

      “It is an amazing coincidence.”

      “A coincidence! Here is one of the three men whom we had named as
      possible actors in this drama, and he meets a violent death
      during the very hours when we know that that drama was being
      enacted. The odds are enormous against its being coincidence. No
      figures could express them. No, my dear Watson, the two events
      are connected—_must_ be connected. It is for us to find the
      connection.”

      “But now the official police must know all.”

      “Not at all. They know all they see at Godolphin Street. They
      know—and shall know—nothing of Whitehall Terrace. Only _we_ know
      of both events, and can trace the relation between them. There is
      one obvious point which would, in any case, have turned my
      suspicions against Lucas. Godolphin Street, Westminster, is only
      a few minutes’ walk from Whitehall Terrace. The other secret
      agents whom I have named live in the extreme West End. It was
      easier, therefore, for Lucas than for the others to establish a
      connection or receive a message from the European Secretary’s
      household—a small thing, and yet where events are compressed into
      a few hours it may prove essential. Halloa! what have we here?”

      Mrs. Hudson had appeared with a lady’s card upon her salver.
      Holmes glanced at it, raised his eyebrows, and handed it over to
      me.

      “Ask Lady Hilda Trelawney Hope if she will be kind enough to step
      up,” said he.

      A moment later our modest apartment, already so distinguished
      that morning, was further honoured by the entrance of the most
      lovely woman in London. I had often heard of the beauty of the
      youngest daughter of the Duke of Belminster, but no description
      of it, and no contemplation of colourless photographs, had
      prepared me for the subtle, delicate charm and the beautiful
      colouring of that exquisite head. And yet as we saw it that
      autumn morning, it was not its beauty which would be the first
      thing to impress the observer. The cheek was lovely but it was
      paled with emotion, the eyes were bright but it was the
      brightness of fever, the sensitive mouth was tight and drawn in
      an effort after self-command. Terror—not beauty—was what sprang
      first to the eye as our fair visitor stood framed for an instant
      in the open door.

      “Has my husband been here, Mr. Holmes?”

      “Yes, madam, he has been here.”

      “Mr. Holmes. I implore you not to tell him that I came here.”
      Holmes bowed coldly, and motioned the lady to a chair.

      “Your ladyship places me in a very delicate position. I beg that
      you will sit down and tell me what you desire, but I fear that I
      cannot make any unconditional promise.”

      She swept across the room and seated herself with her back to the
      window. It was a queenly presence—tall, graceful, and intensely
      womanly. “Mr. Holmes,” she said—and her white-gloved hands
      clasped and unclasped as she spoke—“I will speak frankly to you
      in the hopes that it may induce you to speak frankly in return.
      There is complete confidence between my husband and me on all
      matters save one. That one is politics. On this his lips are
      sealed. He tells me nothing. Now, I am aware that there was a
      most deplorable occurrence in our house last night. I know that a
      paper has disappeared. But because the matter is political my
      husband refuses to take me into his complete confidence. Now it
      is essential—essential, I say—that I should thoroughly understand
      it. You are the only other person, save only these politicians,
      who knows the true facts. I beg you then, Mr. Holmes, to tell me
      exactly what has happened and what it will lead to. Tell me all,
      Mr. Holmes. Let no regard for your client’s interests keep you
      silent, for I assure you that his interests, if he would only see
      it, would be best served by taking me into his complete
      confidence. What was this paper which was stolen?”

      “Madam, what you ask me is really impossible.”

      She groaned and sank her face in her hands.

      “You must see that this is so, madam. If your husband thinks fit
      to keep you in the dark over this matter, is it for me, who has
      only learned the true facts under the pledge of professional
      secrecy, to tell what he has withheld? It is not fair to ask it.
      It is him whom you must ask.”

      “I have asked him. I come to you as a last resource. But without
      your telling me anything definite, Mr. Holmes, you may do a great
      service if you would enlighten me on one point.”

      “What is it, madam?”

      “Is my husband’s political career likely to suffer through this
      incident?”

      “Well, madam, unless it is set right it may certainly have a very
      unfortunate effect.”

      “Ah!” She drew in her breath sharply as one whose doubts are
      resolved.

      “One more question, Mr. Holmes. From an expression which my
      husband dropped in the first shock of this disaster I understood
      that terrible public consequences might arise from the loss of
      this document.”

      “If he said so, I certainly cannot deny it.”

      “Of what nature are they?”

      “Nay, madam, there again you ask me more than I can possibly
      answer.”

      “Then I will take up no more of your time. I cannot blame you,
      Mr. Holmes, for having refused to speak more freely, and you on
      your side will not, I am sure, think the worse of me because I
      desire, even against his will, to share my husband’s anxieties.
      Once more I beg that you will say nothing of my visit.”

      She looked back at us from the door, and I had a last impression
      of that beautiful haunted face, the startled eyes, and the drawn
      mouth. Then she was gone.

      “Now, Watson, the fair sex is your department,” said Holmes, with
      a smile, when the dwindling _frou-frou_ of skirts had ended in
      the slam of the front door. “What was the fair lady’s game? What
      did she really want?”

      “Surely her own statement is clear and her anxiety very natural.”

      “Hum! Think of her appearance, Watson—her manner, her suppressed
      excitement, her restlessness, her tenacity in asking questions.
      Remember that she comes of a caste who do not lightly show
      emotion.”

      “She was certainly much moved.”

      “Remember also the curious earnestness with which she assured us
      that it was best for her husband that she should know all. What
      did she mean by that? And you must have observed, Watson, how she
      manœuvred to have the light at her back. She did not wish us to
      read her expression.”

      “Yes, she chose the one chair in the room.”

      “And yet the motives of women are so inscrutable. You remember
      the woman at Margate whom I suspected for the same reason. No
      powder on her nose—that proved to be the correct solution. How
      can you build on such a quicksand? Their most trivial action may
      mean volumes, or their most extraordinary conduct may depend upon
      a hairpin or a curling tongs. Good-morning, Watson.”

      “You are off?”

      “Yes, I will while away the morning at Godolphin Street with our
      friends of the regular establishment. With Eduardo Lucas lies the
      solution of our problem, though I must admit that I have not an
      inkling as to what form it may take. It is a capital mistake to
      theorize in advance of the facts. Do you stay on guard, my good
      Watson, and receive any fresh visitors. I’ll join you at lunch if
      I am able.”

      All that day and the next and the next Holmes was in a mood which
      his friends would call taciturn, and others morose. He ran out
      and ran in, smoked incessantly, played snatches on his violin,
      sank into reveries, devoured sandwiches at irregular hours, and
      hardly answered the casual questions which I put to him. It was
      evident to me that things were not going well with him or his
      quest. He would say nothing of the case, and it was from the
      papers that I learned the particulars of the inquest, and the
      arrest with the subsequent release of John Mitton, the valet of
      the deceased. The coroner’s jury brought in the obvious Wilful
      Murder, but the parties remained as unknown as ever. No motive
      was suggested. The room was full of articles of value, but none
      had been taken. The dead man’s papers had not been tampered with.
      They were carefully examined, and showed that he was a keen
      student of international politics, an indefatigable gossip, a
      remarkable linguist, and an untiring letter writer. He had been
      on intimate terms with the leading politicians of several
      countries. But nothing sensational was discovered among the
      documents which filled his drawers. As to his relations with
      women, they appeared to have been promiscuous but superficial. He
      had many acquaintances among them, but few friends, and no one
      whom he loved. His habits were regular, his conduct inoffensive.
      His death was an absolute mystery and likely to remain so.

      As to the arrest of John Mitton, the valet, it was a council of
      despair as an alternative to absolute inaction. But no case could
      be sustained against him. He had visited friends in Hammersmith
      that night. The _alibi_ was complete. It is true that he started
      home at an hour which should have brought him to Westminster
      before the time when the crime was discovered, but his own
      explanation that he had walked part of the way seemed probable
      enough in view of the fineness of the night. He had actually
      arrived at twelve o’clock, and appeared to be overwhelmed by the
      unexpected tragedy. He had always been on good terms with his
      master. Several of the dead man’s possessions—notably a small
      case of razors—had been found in the valet’s boxes, but he
      explained that they had been presents from the deceased, and the
      housekeeper was able to corroborate the story. Mitton had been in
      Lucas’s employment for three years. It was noticeable that Lucas
      did not take Mitton on the Continent with him. Sometimes he
      visited Paris for three months on end, but Mitton was left in
      charge of the Godolphin Street house. As to the housekeeper, she
      had heard nothing on the night of the crime. If her master had a
      visitor he had himself admitted him.

      So for three mornings the mystery remained, so far as I could
      follow it in the papers. If Holmes knew more, he kept his own
      counsel, but, as he told me that Inspector Lestrade had taken him
      into his confidence in the case, I knew that he was in close
      touch with every development. Upon the fourth day there appeared
      a long telegram from Paris which seemed to solve the whole
      question.

      A discovery has just been made by the Parisian police (said the
      _Daily Telegraph_) which raises the veil which hung round the
      tragic fate of Mr. Eduardo Lucas, who met his death by violence
      last Monday night at Godolphin Street, Westminster. Our readers
      will remember that the deceased gentleman was found stabbed in
      his room, and that some suspicion attached to his valet, but that
      the case broke down on an _alibi_. Yesterday a lady, who has been
      known as Mme. Henri Fournaye, occupying a small villa in the Rue
      Austerlitz, was reported to the authorities by her servants as
      being insane. An examination showed she had indeed developed
      mania of a dangerous and permanent form. On inquiry, the police
      have discovered that Mme. Henri Fournaye only returned from a
      journey to London on Tuesday last, and there is evidence to
      connect her with the crime at Westminster. A comparison of
      photographs has proved conclusively that M. Henri Fournaye and
      Eduardo Lucas were really one and the same person, and that the
      deceased had for some reason lived a double life in London and
      Paris. Mme. Fournaye, who is of Creole origin, is of an extremely
      excitable nature, and has suffered in the past from attacks of
      jealousy which have amounted to frenzy. It is conjectured that it
      was in one of these that she committed the terrible crime which
      has caused such a sensation in London. Her movements upon the
      Monday night have not yet been traced, but it is undoubted that a
      woman answering to her description attracted much attention at
      Charing Cross Station on Tuesday morning by the wildness of her
      appearance and the violence of her gestures. It is probable,
      therefore, that the crime was either committed when insane, or
      that its immediate effect was to drive the unhappy woman out of
      her mind. At present she is unable to give any coherent account
      of the past, and the doctors hold out no hopes of the
      reestablishment of her reason. There is evidence that a woman,
      who might have been Mme. Fournaye, was seen for some hours upon
      Monday night watching the house in Godolphin Street.

      “What do you think of that, Holmes?” I had read the account aloud
      to him, while he finished his breakfast.

      “My dear Watson,” said he, as he rose from the table and paced up
      and down the room, “You are most long-suffering, but if I have
      told you nothing in the last three days, it is because there is
      nothing to tell. Even now this report from Paris does not help us
      much.”

      “Surely it is final as regards the man’s death.”

      “The man’s death is a mere incident—a trivial episode—in
      comparison with our real task, which is to trace this document
      and save a European catastrophe. Only one important thing has
      happened in the last three days, and that is that nothing has
      happened. I get reports almost hourly from the government, and it
      is certain that nowhere in Europe is there any sign of trouble.
      Now, if this letter were loose—no, it _can’t_ be loose—but if it
      isn’t loose, where can it be? Who has it? Why is it held back?
      That’s the question that beats in my brain like a hammer. Was it,
      indeed, a coincidence that Lucas should meet his death on the
      night when the letter disappeared? Did the letter ever reach him?
      If so, why is it not among his papers? Did this mad wife of his
      carry it off with her? If so, is it in her house in Paris? How
      could I search for it without the French police having their
      suspicions aroused? It is a case, my dear Watson, where the law
      is as dangerous to us as the criminals are. Every man’s hand is
      against us, and yet the interests at stake are colossal. Should I
      bring it to a successful conclusion, it will certainly represent
      the crowning glory of my career. Ah, here is my latest from the
      front!” He glanced hurriedly at the note which had been handed
      in. “Halloa! Lestrade seems to have observed something of
      interest. Put on your hat, Watson, and we will stroll down
      together to Westminster.”

      It was my first visit to the scene of the crime—a high, dingy,
      narrow-chested house, prim, formal, and solid, like the century
      which gave it birth. Lestrade’s bulldog features gazed out at us
      from the front window, and he greeted us warmly when a big
      constable had opened the door and let us in. The room into which
      we were shown was that in which the crime had been committed, but
      no trace of it now remained save an ugly, irregular stain upon
      the carpet. This carpet was a small square drugget in the centre
      of the room, surrounded by a broad expanse of beautiful,
      old-fashioned wood-flooring in square blocks, highly polished.
      Over the fireplace was a magnificent trophy of weapons, one of
      which had been used on that tragic night. In the window was a
      sumptuous writing-desk, and every detail of the apartment, the
      pictures, the rugs, and the hangings, all pointed to a taste
      which was luxurious to the verge of effeminacy.

      “Seen the Paris news?” asked Lestrade.

      Holmes nodded.

      “Our French friends seem to have touched the spot this time. No
      doubt it’s just as they say. She knocked at the door—surprise
      visit, I guess, for he kept his life in water-tight
      compartments—he let her in, couldn’t keep her in the street. She
      told him how she had traced him, reproached him. One thing led to
      another, and then with that dagger so handy the end soon came. It
      wasn’t all done in an instant, though, for these chairs were all
      swept over yonder, and he had one in his hand as if he had tried
      to hold her off with it. We’ve got it all clear as if we had seen
      it.”

      Holmes raised his eyebrows.

      “And yet you have sent for me?”

      “Ah, yes, that’s another matter—a mere trifle, but the sort of
      thing you take an interest in—queer, you know, and what you might
      call freakish. It has nothing to do with the main fact—can’t
      have, on the face of it.”

      “What is it, then?”

      “Well, you know, after a crime of this sort we are very careful
      to keep things in their position. Nothing has been moved. Officer
      in charge here day and night. This morning, as the man was buried
      and the investigation over—so far as this room is concerned—we
      thought we could tidy up a bit. This carpet. You see, it is not
      fastened down, only just laid there. We had occasion to raise it.
      We found——”

      “Yes? You found——”

      Holmes’s face grew tense with anxiety.

      “Well, I’m sure you would never guess in a hundred years what we
      did find. You see that stain on the carpet? Well, a great deal
      must have soaked through, must it not?”

      “Undoubtedly it must.”

      “Well, you will be surprised to hear that there is no stain on
      the white woodwork to correspond.”

      “No stain! But there must——”

      “Yes, so you would say. But the fact remains that there isn’t.”

      He took the corner of the carpet in his hand and, turning it
      over, he showed that it was indeed as he said.

      “But the under side is as stained as the upper. It must have left
      a mark.”

      Lestrade chuckled with delight at having puzzled the famous
      expert.

      “Now, I’ll show you the explanation. There _is_ a second stain,
      but it does not correspond with the other. See for yourself.” As
      he spoke he turned over another portion of the carpet, and there,
      sure enough, was a great crimson spill upon the square white
      facing of the old-fashioned floor. “What do you make of that, Mr.
      Holmes?”

      “Why, it is simple enough. The two stains did correspond, but the
      carpet has been turned round. As it was square and unfastened it
      was easily done.”

      “The official police don’t need you, Mr. Holmes, to tell them
      that the carpet must have been turned round. That’s clear enough,
      for the stains lie above each other—if you lay it over this way.
      But what I want to know is, who shifted the carpet, and why?”

      I could see from Holmes’s rigid face that he was vibrating with
      inward excitement.

      “Look here, Lestrade,” said he, “has that constable in the
      passage been in charge of the place all the time?”

      “Yes, he has.”

      “Well, take my advice. Examine him carefully. Don’t do it before
      us. We’ll wait here. You take him into the back room. You’ll be
      more likely to get a confession out of him alone. Ask him how he
      dared to admit people and leave them alone in this room. Don’t
      ask him if he has done it. Take it for granted. Tell him you
      _know_ someone has been here. Press him. Tell him that a full
      confession is his only chance of forgiveness. Do exactly what I
      tell you!”

      “By George, if he knows I’ll have it out of him!” cried Lestrade.
      He darted into the hall, and a few moments later his bullying
      voice sounded from the back room.

      “Now, Watson, now!” cried Holmes with frenzied eagerness. All the
      demoniacal force of the man masked behind that listless manner
      burst out in a paroxysm of energy. He tore the drugget from the
      floor, and in an instant was down on his hands and knees clawing
      at each of the squares of wood beneath it. One turned sideways as
      he dug his nails into the edge of it. It hinged back like the lid
      of a box. A small black cavity opened beneath it. Holmes plunged
      his eager hand into it and drew it out with a bitter snarl of
      anger and disappointment. It was empty.

      “Quick, Watson, quick! Get it back again!” The wooden lid was
      replaced, and the drugget had only just been drawn straight when
      Lestrade’s voice was heard in the passage. He found Holmes
      leaning languidly against the mantelpiece, resigned and patient,
      endeavouring to conceal his irrepressible yawns.

      “Sorry to keep you waiting, Mr. Holmes, I can see that you are
      bored to death with the whole affair. Well, he has confessed, all
      right. Come in here, MacPherson. Let these gentlemen hear of your
      most inexcusable conduct.”

      The big constable, very hot and penitent, sidled into the room.

      “I meant no harm, sir, I’m sure. The young woman came to the door
      last evening—mistook the house, she did. And then we got talking.
      It’s lonesome, when you’re on duty here all day.”

      “Well, what happened then?”

      “She wanted to see where the crime was done—had read about it in
      the papers, she said. She was a very respectable, well-spoken
      young woman, sir, and I saw no harm in letting her have a peep.
      When she saw that mark on the carpet, down she dropped on the
      floor, and lay as if she were dead. I ran to the back and got
      some water, but I could not bring her to. Then I went round the
      corner to the Ivy Plant for some brandy, and by the time I had
      brought it back the young woman had recovered and was off—ashamed
      of herself, I daresay, and dared not face me.”

      “How about moving that drugget?”

      “Well, sir, it was a bit rumpled, certainly, when I came back.
      You see, she fell on it and it lies on a polished floor with
      nothing to keep it in place. I straightened it out afterwards.”

      “It’s a lesson to you that you can’t deceive me, Constable
      MacPherson,” said Lestrade, with dignity. “No doubt you thought
      that your breach of duty could never be discovered, and yet a
      mere glance at that drugget was enough to convince me that
      someone had been admitted to the room. It’s lucky for you, my
      man, that nothing is missing, or you would find yourself in Queer
      Street. I’m sorry to have called you down over such a petty
      business, Mr. Holmes, but I thought the point of the second stain
      not corresponding with the first would interest you.”

      “Certainly, it was most interesting. Has this woman only been
      here once, constable?”

      “Yes, sir, only once.”

      “Who was she?”

      “Don’t know the name, sir. Was answering an advertisement about
      typewriting and came to the wrong number—very pleasant, genteel
      young woman, sir.”

      “Tall? Handsome?”

      “Yes, sir, she was a well-grown young woman. I suppose you might
      say she was handsome. Perhaps some would say she was very
      handsome. ‘Oh, officer, do let me have a peep!’ says she. She had
      pretty, coaxing ways, as you might say, and I thought there was
      no harm in letting her just put her head through the door.”

      “How was she dressed?”

      “Quiet, sir—a long mantle down to her feet.”

      “What time was it?”

      “It was just growing dusk at the time. They were lighting the
      lamps as I came back with the brandy.”

      “Very good,” said Holmes. “Come, Watson, I think that we have
      more important work elsewhere.”

      As we left the house Lestrade remained in the front room, while
      the repentant constable opened the door to let us out. Holmes
      turned on the step and held up something in his hand. The
      constable stared intently.

      “Good Lord, sir!” he cried, with amazement on his face. Holmes
      put his finger on his lips, replaced his hand in his breast
      pocket, and burst out laughing as we turned down the street.
      “Excellent!” said he. “Come, friend Watson, the curtain rings up
      for the last act. You will be relieved to hear that there will be
      no war, that the Right Honourable Trelawney Hope will suffer no
      setback in his brilliant career, that the indiscreet Sovereign
      will receive no punishment for his indiscretion, that the Prime
      Minister will have no European complication to deal with, and
      that with a little tact and management upon our part nobody will
      be a penny the worse for what might have been a very ugly
      incident.”

      My mind filled with admiration for this extraordinary man.

      “You have solved it!” I cried.

      “Hardly that, Watson. There are some points which are as dark as
      ever. But we have so much that it will be our own fault if we
      cannot get the rest. We will go straight to Whitehall Terrace and
      bring the matter to a head.”

      When we arrived at the residence of the European Secretary it was
      for Lady Hilda Trelawney Hope that Sherlock Holmes inquired. We
      were shown into the morning-room.

      “Mr. Holmes!” said the lady, and her face was pink with her
      indignation. “This is surely most unfair and ungenerous upon your
      part. I desired, as I have explained, to keep my visit to you a
      secret, lest my husband should think that I was intruding into
      his affairs. And yet you compromise me by coming here and so
      showing that there are business relations between us.”

      “Unfortunately, madam, I had no possible alternative. I have been
      commissioned to recover this immensely important paper. I must
      therefore ask you, madam, to be kind enough to place it in my
      hands.”

      The lady sprang to her feet, with the colour all dashed in an
      instant from her beautiful face. Her eyes glazed—she tottered—I
      thought that she would faint. Then with a grand effort she
      rallied from the shock, and a supreme astonishment and
      indignation chased every other expression from her features.

      “You—you insult me, Mr. Holmes.”

      “Come, come, madam, it is useless. Give up the letter.”

      She darted to the bell.

      “The butler shall show you out.”

      “Do not ring, Lady Hilda. If you do, then all my earnest efforts
      to avoid a scandal will be frustrated. Give up the letter and all
      will be set right. If you will work with me I can arrange
      everything. If you work against me I must expose you.”

      She stood grandly defiant, a queenly figure, her eyes fixed upon
      his as if she would read his very soul. Her hand was on the bell,
      but she had forborne to ring it.

      “You are trying to frighten me. It is not a very manly thing, Mr.
      Holmes, to come here and browbeat a woman. You say that you know
      something. What is it that you know?”

      “Pray sit down, madam. You will hurt yourself there if you fall.
      I will not speak until you sit down. Thank you.”

      “I give you five minutes, Mr. Holmes.”

      “One is enough, Lady Hilda. I know of your visit to Eduardo
      Lucas, of your giving him this document, of your ingenious return
      to the room last night, and of the manner in which you took the
      letter from the hiding-place under the carpet.”

      She stared at him with an ashen face and gulped twice before she
      could speak.

      “You are mad, Mr. Holmes—you are mad!” she cried, at last.

      He drew a small piece of cardboard from his pocket. It was the
      face of a woman cut out of a portrait.

      “I have carried this because I thought it might be useful,” said
      he. “The policeman has recognized it.”

      She gave a gasp, and her head dropped back in the chair.

      “Come, Lady Hilda. You have the letter. The matter may still be
      adjusted. I have no desire to bring trouble to you. My duty ends
      when I have returned the lost letter to your husband. Take my
      advice and be frank with me. It is your only chance.”

      Her courage was admirable. Even now she would not own defeat.

      “I tell you again, Mr. Holmes, that you are under some absurd
      illusion.”

      Holmes rose from his chair.

      “I am sorry for you, Lady Hilda. I have done my best for you. I
      can see that it is all in vain.”

      He rang the bell. The butler entered.

      “Is Mr. Trelawney Hope at home?”

      “He will be home, sir, at a quarter to one.”

      Holmes glanced at his watch.

      “Still a quarter of an hour,” said he. “Very good, I shall wait.”

      The butler had hardly closed the door behind him when Lady Hilda
      was down on her knees at Holmes’s feet, her hands outstretched,
      her beautiful face upturned and wet with her tears.

      “Oh, spare me, Mr. Holmes! Spare me!” she pleaded, in a frenzy of
      supplication. “For heaven’s sake, don’t tell him! I love him so!
      I would not bring one shadow on his life, and this I know would
      break his noble heart.”

      Holmes raised the lady. “I am thankful, madam, that you have come
      to your senses even at this last moment! There is not an instant
      to lose. Where is the letter?”

      She darted across to a writing-desk, unlocked it, and drew out a
      long blue envelope.

      “Here it is, Mr. Holmes. Would to heaven I had never seen it!”

      “How can we return it?” Holmes muttered. “Quick, quick, we must
      think of some way! Where is the despatch-box?”

      “Still in his bedroom.”

      “What a stroke of luck! Quick, madam, bring it here!” A moment
      later she had appeared with a red flat box in her hand.

      “How did you open it before? You have a duplicate key? Yes, of
      course you have. Open it!”

      From out of her bosom Lady Hilda had drawn a small key. The box
      flew open. It was stuffed with papers. Holmes thrust the blue
      envelope deep down into the heart of them, between the leaves of
      some other document. The box was shut, locked, and returned to
      the bedroom.

      “Now we are ready for him,” said Holmes. “We have still ten
      minutes. I am going far to screen you, Lady Hilda. In return you
      will spend the time in telling me frankly the real meaning of
      this extraordinary affair.”

      “Mr. Holmes, I will tell you everything,” cried the lady. “Oh,
      Mr. Holmes, I would cut off my right hand before I gave him a
      moment of sorrow! There is no woman in all London who loves her
      husband as I do, and yet if he knew how I have acted—how I have
      been compelled to act—he would never forgive me. For his own
      honour stands so high that he could not forget or pardon a lapse
      in another. Help me, Mr. Holmes! My happiness, his happiness, our
      very lives are at stake!”

      “Quick, madam, the time grows short!”

      “It was a letter of mine, Mr. Holmes, an indiscreet letter
      written before my marriage—a foolish letter, a letter of an
      impulsive, loving girl. I meant no harm, and yet he would have
      thought it criminal. Had he read that letter his confidence would
      have been forever destroyed. It is years since I wrote it. I had
      thought that the whole matter was forgotten. Then at last I heard
      from this man, Lucas, that it had passed into his hands, and that
      he would lay it before my husband. I implored his mercy. He said
      that he would return my letter if I would bring him a certain
      document which he described in my husband’s despatch-box. He had
      some spy in the office who had told him of its existence. He
      assured me that no harm could come to my husband. Put yourself in
      my position, Mr. Holmes! What was I to do?”

      “Take your husband into your confidence.”

      “I could not, Mr. Holmes, I could not! On the one side seemed
      certain ruin, on the other, terrible as it seemed to take my
      husband’s paper, still in a matter of politics I could not
      understand the consequences, while in a matter of love and trust
      they were only too clear to me. I did it, Mr. Holmes! I took an
      impression of his key. This man, Lucas, furnished a duplicate. I
      opened his despatch-box, took the paper, and conveyed it to
      Godolphin Street.”

      “What happened there, madam?”

      “I tapped at the door as agreed. Lucas opened it. I followed him
      into his room, leaving the hall door ajar behind me, for I feared
      to be alone with the man. I remember that there was a woman
      outside as I entered. Our business was soon done. He had my
      letter on his desk, I handed him the document. He gave me the
      letter. At this instant there was a sound at the door. There were
      steps in the passage. Lucas quickly turned back the drugget,
      thrust the document into some hiding-place there, and covered it
      over.

      “What happened after that is like some fearful dream. I have a
      vision of a dark, frantic face, of a woman’s voice, which
      screamed in French, ‘My waiting is not in vain. At last, at last
      I have found you with her!’ There was a savage struggle. I saw
      him with a chair in his hand, a knife gleamed in hers. I rushed
      from the horrible scene, ran from the house, and only next
      morning in the paper did I learn the dreadful result. That night
      I was happy, for I had my letter, and I had not seen yet what the
      future would bring.

      “It was the next morning that I realized that I had only
      exchanged one trouble for another. My husband’s anguish at the
      loss of his paper went to my heart. I could hardly prevent myself
      from there and then kneeling down at his feet and telling him
      what I had done. But that again would mean a confession of the
      past. I came to you that morning in order to understand the full
      enormity of my offence. From the instant that I grasped it my
      whole mind was turned to the one thought of getting back my
      husband’s paper. It must still be where Lucas had placed it, for
      it was concealed before this dreadful woman entered the room. If
      it had not been for her coming, I should not have known where his
      hiding-place was. How was I to get into the room? For two days I
      watched the place, but the door was never left open. Last night I
      made a last attempt. What I did and how I succeeded, you have
      already learned. I brought the paper back with me, and thought of
      destroying it, since I could see no way of returning it without
      confessing my guilt to my husband. Heavens, I hear his step upon
      the stair!”

      The European Secretary burst excitedly into the room. “Any news,
      Mr. Holmes, any news?” he cried.

      “I have some hopes.”

      “Ah, thank heaven!” His face became radiant. “The Prime Minister
      is lunching with me. May he share your hopes? He has nerves of
      steel, and yet I know that he has hardly slept since this
      terrible event. Jacobs, will you ask the Prime Minister to come
      up? As to you, dear, I fear that this is a matter of politics. We
      will join you in a few minutes in the dining-room.”

      The Prime Minister’s manner was subdued, but I could see by the
      gleam of his eyes and the twitchings of his bony hands that he
      shared the excitement of his young colleague.

      “I understand that you have something to report, Mr. Holmes?”

      “Purely negative as yet,” my friend answered. “I have inquired at
      every point where it might be, and I am sure that there is no
      danger to be apprehended.”

      “But that is not enough, Mr. Holmes. We cannot live forever on
      such a volcano. We must have something definite.”

      “I am in hopes of getting it. That is why I am here. The more I
      think of the matter the more convinced I am that the letter has
      never left this house.”

      “Mr. Holmes!”

      “If it had it would certainly have been public by now.”

      “But why should anyone take it in order to keep it in his house?”

      “I am not convinced that anyone did take it.”

      “Then how could it leave the despatch-box?”

      “I am not convinced that it ever did leave the despatch-box.”

      “Mr. Holmes, this joking is very ill-timed. You have my assurance
      that it left the box.”

      “Have you examined the box since Tuesday morning?”

      “No. It was not necessary.”

      “You may conceivably have overlooked it.”

      “Impossible, I say.”

      “But I am not convinced of it. I have known such things to
      happen. I presume there are other papers there. Well, it may have
      got mixed with them.”

      “It was on the top.”

      “Someone may have shaken the box and displaced it.”

      “No, no, I had everything out.”

      “Surely it is easily decided, Hope,” said the Premier. “Let us
      have the despatch-box brought in.”

      The Secretary rang the bell.

      “Jacobs, bring down my despatch-box. This is a farcical waste of
      time, but still, if nothing else will satisfy you, it shall be
      done. Thank you, Jacobs, put it here. I have always had the key
      on my watch-chain. Here are the papers, you see. Letter from Lord
      Merrow, report from Sir Charles Hardy, memorandum from Belgrade,
      note on the Russo-German grain taxes, letter from Madrid, note
      from Lord Flowers——Good heavens! what is this? Lord Bellinger!
      Lord Bellinger!”

      The Premier snatched the blue envelope from his hand.

      “Yes, it is it—and the letter is intact. Hope, I congratulate
      you.”

      “Thank you! Thank you! What a weight from my heart. But this is
      inconceivable—impossible. Mr. Holmes, you are a wizard, a
      sorcerer! How did you know it was there?”

      “Because I knew it was nowhere else.”

      “I cannot believe my eyes!” He ran wildly to the door. “Where is
      my wife? I must tell her that all is well. Hilda! Hilda!” we
      heard his voice on the stairs.

      The Premier looked at Holmes with twinkling eyes.

      “Come, sir,” said he. “There is more in this than meets the eye.
      How came the letter back in the box?”

      Holmes turned away smiling from the keen scrutiny of those
      wonderful eyes.

      “We also have our diplomatic secrets,” said he and, picking up
      his hat, he turned to the door.

      THE END




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RETURN OF SHERLOCK HOLMES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.




﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Sign of the Four
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Sign of the Four

Author: Arthur Conan Doyle

Release date: March 1, 2000 [eBook #2097]
                Most recently updated: December 14, 2025

Language: English



*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SIGN OF THE FOUR ***




The Sign of the Four

by Arthur Conan Doyle




Contents


   Chapter I. The Science of Deduction
   Chapter II. The Statement of the Case
   Chapter III. In Quest of a Solution
   Chapter IV. The Story of the Bald-Headed Man
   Chapter V. The Tragedy of Pondicherry Lodge
   Chapter VI. Sherlock Holmes Gives a Demonstration
   Chapter VII. The Episode of the Barrel
   Chapter VIII. The Baker Street Irregulars
   Chapter IX. A Break in the Chain
   Chapter X. The End of the Islander
   Chapter XI. The Great Agra Treasure
   Chapter XII. The Strange Story of Jonathan Small




Chapter I
The Science of Deduction


Sherlock Holmes took his bottle from the corner of the mantel-piece and
his hypodermic syringe from its neat morocco case. With his long,
white, nervous fingers he adjusted the delicate needle, and rolled back
his left shirt-cuff. For some little time his eyes rested thoughtfully
upon the sinewy forearm and wrist all dotted and scarred with
innumerable puncture-marks. Finally he thrust the sharp point home,
pressed down the tiny piston, and sank back into the velvet-lined
arm-chair with a long sigh of satisfaction.

Three times a day for many months I had witnessed this performance, but
custom had not reconciled my mind to it. On the contrary, from day to
day I had become more irritable at the sight, and my conscience swelled
nightly within me at the thought that I had lacked the courage to
protest. Again and again I had registered a vow that I should deliver
my soul upon the subject, but there was that in the cool, nonchalant
air of my companion which made him the last man with whom one would
care to take anything approaching to a liberty. His great powers, his
masterly manner, and the experience which I had had of his many
extraordinary qualities, all made me diffident and backward in crossing
him.

Yet upon that afternoon, whether it was the Beaune which I had taken
with my lunch, or the additional exasperation produced by the extreme
deliberation of his manner, I suddenly felt that I could hold out no
longer.

“Which is it to-day?” I asked,—“morphine or cocaine?”

He raised his eyes languidly from the old black-letter volume which he
had opened. “It is cocaine,” he said,—“a seven-per-cent. solution.
Would you care to try it?”

“No, indeed,” I answered, brusquely. “My constitution has not got over
the Afghan campaign yet. I cannot afford to throw any extra strain upon
it.”

He smiled at my vehemence. “Perhaps you are right, Watson,” he said. “I
suppose that its influence is physically a bad one. I find it, however,
so transcendently stimulating and clarifying to the mind that its
secondary action is a matter of small moment.”

“But consider!” I said, earnestly. “Count the cost! Your brain may, as
you say, be roused and excited, but it is a pathological and morbid
process, which involves increased tissue-change and may at last leave a
permanent weakness. You know, too, what a black reaction comes upon
you. Surely the game is hardly worth the candle. Why should you, for a
mere passing pleasure, risk the loss of those great powers with which
you have been endowed? Remember that I speak not only as one comrade to
another, but as a medical man to one for whose constitution he is to
some extent answerable.”

He did not seem offended. On the contrary, he put his finger-tips
together and leaned his elbows on the arms of his chair, like one who
has a relish for conversation.

“My mind,” he said, “rebels at stagnation. Give me problems, give me
work, give me the most abstruse cryptogram or the most intricate
analysis, and I am in my own proper atmosphere. I can dispense then
with artificial stimulants. But I abhor the dull routine of existence.
I crave for mental exaltation. That is why I have chosen my own
particular profession,—or rather created it, for I am the only one in
the world.”

“The only unofficial detective?” I said, raising my eyebrows.

“The only unofficial consulting detective,” he answered. “I am the last
and highest court of appeal in detection. When Gregson or Lestrade or
Athelney Jones are out of their depths—which, by the way, is their
normal state—the matter is laid before me. I examine the data, as an
expert, and pronounce a specialist’s opinion. I claim no credit in such
cases. My name figures in no newspaper. The work itself, the pleasure
of finding a field for my peculiar powers, is my highest reward. But
you have yourself had some experience of my methods of work in the
Jefferson Hope case.”

“Yes, indeed,” said I, cordially. “I was never so struck by anything in
my life. I even embodied it in a small brochure with the somewhat
fantastic title of ‘A Study in Scarlet.’”

He shook his head sadly. “I glanced over it,” said he. “Honestly, I
cannot congratulate you upon it. Detection is, or ought to be, an exact
science, and should be treated in the same cold and unemotional manner.
You have attempted to tinge it with romanticism, which produces much
the same effect as if you worked a love-story or an elopement into the
fifth proposition of Euclid.”

“But the romance was there,” I remonstrated. “I could not tamper with
the facts.”

“Some facts should be suppressed, or at least a just sense of
proportion should be observed in treating them. The only point in the
case which deserved mention was the curious analytical reasoning from
effects to causes by which I succeeded in unraveling it.”

I was annoyed at this criticism of a work which had been specially
designed to please him. I confess, too, that I was irritated by the
egotism which seemed to demand that every line of my pamphlet should be
devoted to his own special doings. More than once during the years that
I had lived with him in Baker Street I had observed that a small vanity
underlay my companion’s quiet and didactic manner. I made no remark,
however, but sat nursing my wounded leg. I had a Jezail bullet through
it some time before, and, though it did not prevent me from walking, it
ached wearily at every change of the weather.

“My practice has extended recently to the Continent,” said Holmes,
after a while, filling up his old brier-root pipe. “I was consulted
last week by François Le Villard, who, as you probably know, has come
rather to the front lately in the French detective service. He has all
the Celtic power of quick intuition, but he is deficient in the wide
range of exact knowledge which is essential to the higher developments
of his art. The case was concerned with a will, and possessed some
features of interest. I was able to refer him to two parallel cases,
the one at Riga in 1857, and the other at St. Louis in 1871, which have
suggested to him the true solution. Here is the letter which I had this
morning acknowledging my assistance.” He tossed over, as he spoke, a
crumpled sheet of foreign notepaper. I glanced my eyes down it,
catching a profusion of notes of admiration, with stray “magnifiques,”
“coup-de-maîtres,” and “tours-de-force,” all testifying to the ardent
admiration of the Frenchman.

“He speaks as a pupil to his master,” said I.

“Oh, he rates my assistance too highly,” said Sherlock Holmes, lightly.
“He has considerable gifts himself. He possesses two out of the three
qualities necessary for the ideal detective. He has the power of
observation and that of deduction. He is only wanting in knowledge; and
that may come in time. He is now translating my small works into
French.”

“Your works?”

“Oh, didn’t you know?” he cried, laughing. “Yes, I have been guilty of
several monographs. They are all upon technical subjects. Here, for
example, is one ‘Upon the Distinction between the Ashes of the Various
Tobaccoes.’ In it I enumerate a hundred and forty forms of cigar-,
cigarette-, and pipe-tobacco, with coloured plates illustrating the
difference in the ash. It is a point which is continually turning up in
criminal trials, and which is sometimes of supreme importance as a
clue. If you can say definitely, for example, that some murder has been
done by a man who was smoking an Indian lunkah, it obviously narrows
your field of search. To the trained eye there is as much difference
between the black ash of a Trichinopoly and the white fluff of
bird’s-eye as there is between a cabbage and a potato.”

“You have an extraordinary genius for minutiæ,” I remarked.

“I appreciate their importance. Here is my monograph upon the tracing
of footsteps, with some remarks upon the uses of plaster of Paris as a
preserver of impresses. Here, too, is a curious little work upon the
influence of a trade upon the form of the hand, with lithotypes of the
hands of slaters, sailors, corkcutters, compositors, weavers, and
diamond-polishers. That is a matter of great practical interest to the
scientific detective,—especially in cases of unclaimed bodies, or in
discovering the antecedents of criminals. But I weary you with my
hobby.”

“Not at all,” I answered, earnestly. “It is of the greatest interest to
me, especially since I have had the opportunity of observing your
practical application of it. But you spoke just now of observation and
deduction. Surely the one to some extent implies the other.”

“Why, hardly,” he answered, leaning back luxuriously in his arm-chair,
and sending up thick blue wreaths from his pipe. “For example,
observation shows me that you have been to the Wigmore Street
Post-Office this morning, but deduction lets me know that when there
you dispatched a telegram.”

“Right!” said I. “Right on both points! But I confess that I don’t see
how you arrived at it. It was a sudden impulse upon my part, and I have
mentioned it to no one.”

“It is simplicity itself,” he remarked, chuckling at my surprise,—“so
absurdly simple that an explanation is superfluous; and yet it may
serve to define the limits of observation and of deduction. Observation
tells me that you have a little reddish mould adhering to your instep.
Just opposite the Wigmore Street Office they have taken up the pavement
and thrown up some earth which lies in such a way that it is difficult
to avoid treading in it in entering. The earth is of this peculiar
reddish tint which is found, as far as I know, nowhere else in the
neighbourhood. So much is observation. The rest is deduction.”

“How, then, did you deduce the telegram?”

“Why, of course I knew that you had not written a letter, since I sat
opposite to you all morning. I see also in your open desk there that
you have a sheet of stamps and a thick bundle of post-cards. What could
you go into the post-office for, then, but to send a wire? Eliminate
all other factors, and the one which remains must be the truth.”

“In this case it certainly is so,” I replied, after a little thought.
“The thing, however, is, as you say, of the simplest. Would you think
me impertinent if I were to put your theories to a more severe test?”

“On the contrary,” he answered, “it would prevent me from taking a
second dose of cocaine. I should be delighted to look into any problem
which you might submit to me.”

“I have heard you say that it is difficult for a man to have any object
in daily use without leaving the impress of his individuality upon it
in such a way that a trained observer might read it. Now, I have here a
watch which has recently come into my possession. Would you have the
kindness to let me have an opinion upon the character or habits of the
late owner?”

I handed him over the watch with some slight feeling of amusement in my
heart, for the test was, as I thought, an impossible one, and I
intended it as a lesson against the somewhat dogmatic tone which he
occasionally assumed. He balanced the watch in his hand, gazed hard at
the dial, opened the back, and examined the works, first with his naked
eyes and then with a powerful convex lens. I could hardly keep from
smiling at his crestfallen face when he finally snapped the case to and
handed it back.

“There are hardly any data,” he remarked. “The watch has been recently
cleaned, which robs me of my most suggestive facts.”

“You are right,” I answered. “It was cleaned before being sent to me.”
In my heart I accused my companion of putting forward a most lame and
impotent excuse to cover his failure. What data could he expect from an
uncleaned watch?

“Though unsatisfactory, my research has not been entirely barren,” he
observed, staring up at the ceiling with dreamy, lack-lustre eyes.
“Subject to your correction, I should judge that the watch belonged to
your elder brother, who inherited it from your father.”

“That you gather, no doubt, from the H. W. upon the back?”

“Quite so. The W. suggests your own name. The date of the watch is
nearly fifty years back, and the initials are as old as the watch: so
it was made for the last generation. Jewelry usually descends to the
eldest son, and he is most likely to have the same name as the father.
Your father has, if I remember right, been dead many years. It has,
therefore, been in the hands of your eldest brother.”

“Right, so far,” said I. “Anything else?”

“He was a man of untidy habits,—very untidy and careless. He was left
with good prospects, but he threw away his chances, lived for some time
in poverty with occasional short intervals of prosperity, and finally,
taking to drink, he died. That is all I can gather.”

I sprang from my chair and limped impatiently about the room with
considerable bitterness in my heart.

“This is unworthy of you, Holmes,” I said. “I could not have believed
that you would have descended to this. You have made inquires into the
history of my unhappy brother, and you now pretend to deduce this
knowledge in some fanciful way. You cannot expect me to believe that
you have read all this from his old watch! It is unkind, and, to speak
plainly, has a touch of charlatanism in it.”

“My dear doctor,” said he, kindly, “pray accept my apologies. Viewing
the matter as an abstract problem, I had forgotten how personal and
painful a thing it might be to you. I assure you, however, that I never
even knew that you had a brother until you handed me the watch.”

“Then how in the name of all that is wonderful did you get these facts?
They are absolutely correct in every particular.”

“Ah, that is good luck. I could only say what was the balance of
probability. I did not at all expect to be so accurate.”

“But it was not mere guess-work?”

“No, no: I never guess. It is a shocking habit,—destructive to the
logical faculty. What seems strange to you is only so because you do
not follow my train of thought or observe the small facts upon which
large inferences may depend. For example, I began by stating that your
brother was careless. When you observe the lower part of that
watch-case you notice that it is not only dinted in two places, but it
is cut and marked all over from the habit of keeping other hard
objects, such as coins or keys, in the same pocket. Surely it is no
great feat to assume that a man who treats a fifty-guinea watch so
cavalierly must be a careless man. Neither is it a very far-fetched
inference that a man who inherits one article of such value is pretty
well provided for in other respects.”

I nodded, to show that I followed his reasoning.

“It is very customary for pawnbrokers in England, when they take a
watch, to scratch the number of the ticket with a pin-point upon the
inside of the case. It is more handy than a label, as there is no risk
of the number being lost or transposed. There are no less than four
such numbers visible to my lens on the inside of this case.
Inference,—that your brother was often at low water. Secondary
inference,—that he had occasional bursts of prosperity, or he could not
have redeemed the pledge. Finally, I ask you to look at the inner
plate, which contains the key-hole. Look at the thousands of scratches
all round the hole,—marks where the key has slipped. What sober man’s
key could have scored those grooves? But you will never see a
drunkard’s watch without them. He winds it at night, and he leaves
these traces of his unsteady hand. Where is the mystery in all this?”

“It is as clear as daylight,” I answered. “I regret the injustice which
I did you. I should have had more faith in your marvellous faculty. May
I ask whether you have any professional inquiry on foot at present?”

“None. Hence the cocaine. I cannot live without brain-work. What else
is there to live for? Stand at the window here. Was ever such a dreary,
dismal, unprofitable world? See how the yellow fog swirls down the
street and drifts across the dun-coloured houses. What could be more
hopelessly prosaic and material? What is the use of having powers,
doctor, when one has no field upon which to exert them? Crime is
commonplace, existence is commonplace, and no qualities save those
which are commonplace have any function upon earth.”

I had opened my mouth to reply to this tirade, when with a crisp knock
our landlady entered, bearing a card upon the brass salver.

“A young lady for you, sir,” she said, addressing my companion.

“Miss Mary Morstan,” he read. “Hum! I have no recollection of the name.
Ask the young lady to step up, Mrs. Hudson. Don’t go, doctor. I should
prefer that you remain.”




Chapter II
The Statement of the Case


Miss Morstan entered the room with a firm step and an outward composure
of manner. She was a blonde young lady, small, dainty, well gloved, and
dressed in the most perfect taste. There was, however, a plainness and
simplicity about her costume which bore with it a suggestion of limited
means. The dress was a sombre greyish beige, untrimmed and unbraided,
and she wore a small turban of the same dull hue, relieved only by a
suspicion of white feather in the side. Her face had neither regularity
of feature nor beauty of complexion, but her expression was sweet and
amiable, and her large blue eyes were singularly spiritual and
sympathetic. In an experience of women which extends over many nations
and three separate continents, I have never looked upon a face which
gave a clearer promise of a refined and sensitive nature. I could not
but observe that as she took the seat which Sherlock Holmes placed for
her, her lip trembled, her hand quivered, and she showed every sign of
intense inward agitation.

“I have come to you, Mr. Holmes,” she said, “because you once enabled
my employer, Mrs. Cecil Forrester, to unravel a little domestic
complication. She was much impressed by your kindness and skill.”

“Mrs. Cecil Forrester,” he repeated thoughtfully. “I believe that I was
of some slight service to her. The case, however, as I remember it, was
a very simple one.”

“She did not think so. But at least you cannot say the same of mine. I
can hardly imagine anything more strange, more utterly inexplicable,
than the situation in which I find myself.”

Holmes rubbed his hands, and his eyes glistened. He leaned forward in
his chair with an expression of extraordinary concentration upon his
clear-cut, hawklike features. “State your case,” said he, in brisk,
business tones.

I felt that my position was an embarrassing one. “You will, I am sure,
excuse me,” I said, rising from my chair.

To my surprise, the young lady held up her gloved hand to detain me.
“If your friend,” she said, “would be good enough to stop, he might be
of inestimable service to me.”

I relapsed into my chair.

“Briefly,” she continued, “the facts are these. My father was an
officer in an Indian regiment who sent me home when I was quite a
child. My mother was dead, and I had no relative in England. I was
placed, however, in a comfortable boarding establishment at Edinburgh,
and there I remained until I was seventeen years of age. In the year
1878 my father, who was senior captain of his regiment, obtained twelve
months’ leave and came home. He telegraphed to me from London that he
had arrived all safe, and directed me to come down at once, giving the
Langham Hotel as his address. His message, as I remember, was full of
kindness and love. On reaching London I drove to the Langham, and was
informed that Captain Morstan was staying there, but that he had gone
out the night before and had not yet returned. I waited all day without
news of him. That night, on the advice of the manager of the hotel, I
communicated with the police, and next morning we advertised in all the
papers. Our inquiries led to no result; and from that day to this no
word has ever been heard of my unfortunate father. He came home with
his heart full of hope, to find some peace, some comfort, and instead—”
She put her hand to her throat, and a choking sob cut short the
sentence.

“The date?” asked Holmes, opening his note-book.

“He disappeared upon the 3rd of December, 1878,—nearly ten years ago.”

“His luggage?”

“Remained at the hotel. There was nothing in it to suggest a clue,—some
clothes, some books, and a considerable number of curiosities from the
Andaman Islands. He had been one of the officers in charge of the
convict-guard there.”

“Had he any friends in town?”

“Only one that we know of,—Major Sholto, of his own regiment, the 34th
Bombay Infantry. The major had retired some little time before, and
lived at Upper Norwood. We communicated with him, of course, but he did
not even know that his brother officer was in England.”

“A singular case,” remarked Holmes.

“I have not yet described to you the most singular part. About six
years ago—to be exact, upon the 4th of May, 1882—an advertisement
appeared in the _Times_ asking for the address of Miss Mary Morstan and
stating that it would be to her advantage to come forward. There was no
name or address appended. I had at that time just entered the family of
Mrs. Cecil Forrester in the capacity of governess. By her advice I
published my address in the advertisement column. The same day there
arrived through the post a small card-board box addressed to me, which
I found to contain a very large and lustrous pearl. No word of writing
was enclosed. Since then every year upon the same date there has always
appeared a similar box, containing a similar pearl, without any clue as
to the sender. They have been pronounced by an expert to be of a rare
variety and of considerable value. You can see for yourselves that they
are very handsome.” She opened a flat box as she spoke, and showed me
six of the finest pearls that I had ever seen.

“Your statement is most interesting,” said Sherlock Holmes. “Has
anything else occurred to you?”

“Yes, and no later than to-day. That is why I have come to you. This
morning I received this letter, which you will perhaps read for
yourself.”

“Thank you,” said Holmes. “The envelope too, please. Postmark, London,
S.W. Date, July 7. Hum! Man’s thumb-mark on corner,—probably postman.
Best quality paper. Envelopes at sixpence a packet. Particular man in
his stationery. No address. ‘Be at the third pillar from the left
outside the Lyceum Theatre to-night at seven o’clock. If you are
distrustful, bring two friends. You are a wronged woman, and shall have
justice. Do not bring police. If you do, all will be in vain. Your
unknown friend.’ Well, really, this is a very pretty little mystery.
What do you intend to do, Miss Morstan?”

“That is exactly what I want to ask you.”

“Then we shall most certainly go. You and I and—yes, why, Dr. Watson is
the very man. Your correspondent says two friends. He and I have worked
together before.”

“But would he come?” she asked, with something appealing in her voice
and expression.

“I should be proud and happy,” said I, fervently, “if I can be of any
service.”

“You are both very kind,” she answered. “I have led a retired life, and
have no friends whom I could appeal to. If I am here at six it will do,
I suppose?”

“You must not be later,” said Holmes. “There is one other point,
however. Is this handwriting the same as that upon the pearl-box
addresses?”

“I have them here,” she answered, producing half a dozen pieces of
paper.

“You are certainly a model client. You have the correct intuition. Let
us see, now.” He spread out the papers upon the table, and gave little
darting glances from one to the other. “They are disguised hands,
except the letter,” he said, presently, “but there can be no question
as to the authorship. See how the irrepressible Greek _e_ will break
out, and see the twirl of the final _s_. They are undoubtedly by the
same person. I should not like to suggest false hopes, Miss Morstan,
but is there any resemblance between this hand and that of your
father?”

“Nothing could be more unlike.”

“I expected to hear you say so. We shall look out for you, then, at
six. Pray allow me to keep the papers. I may look into the matter
before then. It is only half-past three. _Au revoir_, then.”

“_Au revoir_,” said our visitor, and, with a bright, kindly glance from
one to the other of us, she replaced her pearl-box in her bosom and
hurried away. Standing at the window, I watched her walking briskly
down the street, until the grey turban and white feather were but a
speck in the sombre crowd.

“What a very attractive woman!” I exclaimed, turning to my companion.

He had lit his pipe again, and was leaning back with drooping eyelids.
“Is she?” he said, languidly. “I did not observe.”

“You really are an automaton,—a calculating-machine!” I cried. “There
is something positively inhuman in you at times.”

He smiled gently. “It is of the first importance,” he said, “not to
allow your judgment to be biased by personal qualities. A client is to
me a mere unit,—a factor in a problem. The emotional qualities are
antagonistic to clear reasoning. I assure you that the most winning
woman I ever knew was hanged for poisoning three little children for
their insurance-money, and the most repellant man of my acquaintance is
a philanthropist who has spent nearly a quarter of a million upon the
London poor.”

“In this case, however—”

“I never make exceptions. An exception disproves the rule. Have you
ever had occasion to study character in handwriting? What do you make
of this fellow’s scribble?”

“It is legible and regular,” I answered. “A man of business habits and
some force of character.”

Holmes shook his head. “Look at his long letters,” he said. “They
hardly rise above the common herd. That _d_ might be an _a_, and that
_l_ an _e_. Men of character always differentiate their long letters,
however illegibly they may write. There is vacillation in his _k_’s and
self-esteem in his capitals. I am going out now. I have some few
references to make. Let me recommend this book,—one of the most
remarkable ever penned. It is Winwood Reade’s ‘Martyrdom of Man.’ I
shall be back in an hour.”

I sat in the window with the volume in my hand, but my thoughts were
far from the daring speculations of the writer. My mind ran upon our
late visitor,—her smiles, the deep rich tones of her voice, the strange
mystery which overhung her life. If she were seventeen at the time of
her father’s disappearance she must be seven-and-twenty now,—a sweet
age, when youth has lost its self-consciousness and become a little
sobered by experience. So I sat and mused, until such dangerous
thoughts came into my head that I hurried away to my desk and plunged
furiously into the latest treatise upon pathology. What was I, an army
surgeon with a weak leg and a weaker banking-account, that I should
dare to think of such things? She was a unit, a factor,—nothing more.
If my future were black, it was better surely to face it like a man
than to attempt to brighten it by mere will-o’-the-wisps of the
imagination.




Chapter III
In Quest of a Solution


It was half-past five before Holmes returned. He was bright, eager, and
in excellent spirits,—a mood which in his case alternated with fits of
the blackest depression.

“There is no great mystery in this matter,” he said, taking the cup of
tea which I had poured out for him. “The facts appear to admit of only
one explanation.”

“What! you have solved it already?”

“Well, that would be too much to say. I have discovered a suggestive
fact, that is all. It is, however, _very_ suggestive. The details are
still to be added. I have just found, on consulting the back files of
the _Times_, that Major Sholto, of Upper Norwood, late of the 34th
Bombay Infantry, died upon the 28th of April, 1882.”

“I may be very obtuse, Holmes, but I fail to see what this suggests.”

“No? You surprise me. Look at it in this way, then. Captain Morstan
disappears. The only person in London whom he could have visited is
Major Sholto. Major Sholto denies having heard that he was in London.
Four years later Sholto dies. _Within a week of his death_ Captain
Morstan’s daughter receives a valuable present, which is repeated from
year to year, and now culminates in a letter which describes her as a
wronged woman. What wrong can it refer to except this deprivation of
her father? And why should the presents begin immediately after
Sholto’s death, unless it is that Sholto’s heir knows something of the
mystery and desires to make compensation? Have you any alternative
theory which will meet the facts?”

“But what a strange compensation! And how strangely made! Why, too,
should he write a letter now, rather than six years ago? Again, the
letter speaks of giving her justice. What justice can she have? It is
too much to suppose that her father is still alive. There is no other
injustice in her case that you know of.”

“There are difficulties; there are certainly difficulties,” said
Sherlock Holmes, pensively. “But our expedition of to-night will solve
them all. Ah, here is a four-wheeler, and Miss Morstan is inside. Are
you all ready? Then we had better go down, for it is a little past the
hour.”

I picked up my hat and my heaviest stick, but I observed that Holmes
took his revolver from his drawer and slipped it into his pocket. It
was clear that he thought that our night’s work might be a serious one.

Miss Morstan was muffled in a dark cloak, and her sensitive face was
composed, but pale. She must have been more than woman if she did not
feel some uneasiness at the strange enterprise upon which we were
embarking, yet her self-control was perfect, and she readily answered
the few additional questions which Sherlock Holmes put to her.

“Major Sholto was a very particular friend of papa’s,” she said. “His
letters were full of allusions to the major. He and papa were in
command of the troops at the Andaman Islands, so they were thrown a
great deal together. By the way, a curious paper was found in papa’s
desk which no one could understand. I don’t suppose that it is of the
slightest importance, but I thought you might care to see it, so I
brought it with me. It is here.”

Holmes unfolded the paper carefully and smoothed it out upon his knee.
He then very methodically examined it all over with his double lens.

“It is paper of native Indian manufacture,” he remarked. “It has at
some time been pinned to a board. The diagram upon it appears to be a
plan of part of a large building with numerous halls, corridors, and
passages. At one point is a small cross done in red ink, and above it
is ‘3.37 from left,’ in faded pencil-writing. In the left-hand corner
is a curious hieroglyphic like four crosses in a line with their arms
touching. Beside it is written, in very rough and coarse characters,
‘The sign of the four,—Jonathan Small, Mahomet Singh, Abdullah Khan,
Dost Akbar.’ No, I confess that I do not see how this bears upon the
matter. Yet it is evidently a document of importance. It has been kept
carefully in a pocket-book; for the one side is as clean as the other.”

“It was in his pocket-book that we found it.”

“Preserve it carefully, then, Miss Morstan, for it may prove to be of
use to us. I begin to suspect that this matter may turn out to be much
deeper and more subtle than I at first supposed. I must reconsider my
ideas.” He leaned back in the cab, and I could see by his drawn brow
and his vacant eye that he was thinking intently. Miss Morstan and I
chatted in an undertone about our present expedition and its possible
outcome, but our companion maintained his impenetrable reserve until
the end of our journey.

It was a September evening, and not yet seven o’clock, but the day had
been a dreary one, and a dense drizzly fog lay low upon the great city.
Mud-coloured clouds drooped sadly over the muddy streets. Down the
Strand the lamps were but misty splotches of diffused light which threw
a feeble circular glimmer upon the slimy pavement. The yellow glare
from the shop-windows streamed out into the steamy, vaporous air, and
threw a murky, shifting radiance across the crowded thoroughfare. There
was, to my mind, something eerie and ghost-like in the endless
procession of faces which flitted across these narrow bars of
light,—sad faces and glad, haggard and merry. Like all human kind, they
flitted from the gloom into the light, and so back into the gloom once
more. I am not subject to impressions, but the dull, heavy evening,
with the strange business upon which we were engaged, combined to make
me nervous and depressed. I could see from Miss Morstan’s manner that
she was suffering from the same feeling. Holmes alone could rise
superior to petty influences. He held his open note-book upon his knee,
and from time to time he jotted down figures and memoranda in the light
of his pocket-lantern.

At the Lyceum Theatre the crowds were already thick at the
side-entrances. In front a continuous stream of hansoms and
four-wheelers were rattling up, discharging their cargoes of
shirt-fronted men and beshawled, bediamonded women. We had hardly
reached the third pillar, which was our rendezvous, before a small,
dark, brisk man in the dress of a coachman accosted us.

“Are you the parties who come with Miss Morstan?” he asked.

“I am Miss Morstan, and these two gentlemen are my friends,” said she.

He bent a pair of wonderfully penetrating and questioning eyes upon us.
“You will excuse me, miss,” he said with a certain dogged manner, “but
I was to ask you to give me your word that neither of your companions
is a police-officer.”

“I give you my word on that,” she answered.

He gave a shrill whistle, on which a street Arab led across a
four-wheeler and opened the door. The man who had addressed us mounted
to the box, while we took our places inside. We had hardly done so
before the driver whipped up his horse, and we plunged away at a
furious pace through the foggy streets.

The situation was a curious one. We were driving to an unknown place,
on an unknown errand. Yet our invitation was either a complete
hoax,—which was an inconceivable hypothesis,—or else we had good reason
to think that important issues might hang upon our journey. Miss
Morstan’s demeanor was as resolute and collected as ever. I endeavored
to cheer and amuse her by reminiscences of my adventures in
Afghanistan; but, to tell the truth, I was myself so excited at our
situation and so curious as to our destination that my stories were
slightly involved. To this day she declares that I told her one moving
anecdote as to how a musket looked into my tent at the dead of night,
and how I fired a double-barrelled tiger cub at it. At first I had some
idea as to the direction in which we were driving; but soon, what with
our pace, the fog, and my own limited knowledge of London, I lost my
bearings, and knew nothing, save that we seemed to be going a very long
way. Sherlock Holmes was never at fault, however, and he muttered the
names as the cab rattled through squares and in and out by tortuous
by-streets.

“Rochester Row,” said he. “Now Vincent Square. Now we come out on the
Vauxhall Bridge Road. We are making for the Surrey side, apparently.
Yes, I thought so. Now we are on the bridge. You can catch glimpses of
the river.”

We did indeed get a fleeting view of a stretch of the Thames with the
lamps shining upon the broad, silent water; but our cab dashed on, and
was soon involved in a labyrinth of streets upon the other side.

“Wordsworth Road,” said my companion. “Priory Road. Lark Hall Lane.
Stockwell Place. Robert Street. Cold Harbor Lane. Our quest does not
appear to take us to very fashionable regions.”

We had, indeed, reached a questionable and forbidding neighbourhood.
Long lines of dull brick houses were only relieved by the coarse glare
and tawdry brilliancy of public houses at the corner. Then came rows of
two-storied villas each with a fronting of miniature garden, and then
again interminable lines of new staring brick buildings,—the monster
tentacles which the giant city was throwing out into the country. At
last the cab drew up at the third house in a new terrace. None of the
other houses were inhabited, and that at which we stopped was as dark
as its neighbours, save for a single glimmer in the kitchen window. On
our knocking, however, the door was instantly thrown open by a Hindoo
servant clad in a yellow turban, white loose-fitting clothes, and a
yellow sash. There was something strangely incongruous in this Oriental
figure framed in the commonplace doorway of a third-rate suburban
dwelling-house.

“The Sahib awaits you,” said he, and even as he spoke there came a high
piping voice from some inner room. “Show them in to me, khitmutgar,” it
cried. “Show them straight in to me.”




Chapter IV
The Story of the Bald-Headed Man


We followed the Indian down a sordid and common passage, ill-lit and
worse furnished, until he came to a door upon the right, which he threw
open. A blaze of yellow light streamed out upon us, and in the centre
of the glare there stood a small man with a very high head, a bristle
of red hair all round the fringe of it, and a bald, shining scalp which
shot out from among it like a mountain-peak from fir-trees. He writhed
his hands together as he stood, and his features were in a perpetual
jerk, now smiling, now scowling, but never for an instant in repose.
Nature had given him a pendulous lip, and a too visible line of yellow
and irregular teeth, which he strove feebly to conceal by constantly
passing his hand over the lower part of his face. In spite of his
obtrusive baldness, he gave the impression of youth. In point of fact
he had just turned his thirtieth year.

“Your servant, Miss Morstan,” he kept repeating, in a thin, high voice.
“Your servant, gentlemen. Pray step into my little sanctum. A small
place, miss, but furnished to my own liking. An oasis of art in the
howling desert of South London.”

We were all astonished by the appearance of the apartment into which he
invited us. In that sorry house it looked as out of place as a diamond
of the first water in a setting of brass. The richest and glossiest of
curtains and tapestries draped the walls, looped back here and there to
expose some richly-mounted painting or Oriental vase. The carpet was of
amber-and-black, so soft and so thick that the foot sank pleasantly
into it, as into a bed of moss. Two great tiger-skins thrown athwart it
increased the suggestion of Eastern luxury, as did a huge hookah which
stood upon a mat in the corner. A lamp in the fashion of a silver dove
was hung from an almost invisible golden wire in the centre of the
room. As it burned it filled the air with a subtle and aromatic odour.

“Mr. Thaddeus Sholto,” said the little man, still jerking and smiling.
“That is my name. You are Miss Morstan, of course. And these
gentlemen—”

“This is Mr. Sherlock Holmes, and this is Dr. Watson.”

“A doctor, eh?” cried he, much excited. “Have you your stethoscope?
Might I ask you—would you have the kindness? I have grave doubts as to
my mitral valve, if you would be so very good. The aortic I may rely
upon, but I should value your opinion upon the mitral.”

I listened to his heart, as requested, but was unable to find anything
amiss, save indeed that he was in an ecstasy of fear, for he shivered
from head to foot. “It appears to be normal,” I said. “You have no
cause for uneasiness.”

“You will excuse my anxiety, Miss Morstan,” he remarked, airily. “I am
a great sufferer, and I have long had suspicions as to that valve. I am
delighted to hear that they are unwarranted. Had your father, Miss
Morstan, refrained from throwing a strain upon his heart, he might have
been alive now.”

I could have struck the man across the face, so hot was I at this
callous and off-hand reference to so delicate a matter. Miss Morstan
sat down, and her face grew white to the lips. “I knew in my heart that
he was dead,” said she.

“I can give you every information,” said he, “and, what is more, I can
do you justice; and I will, too, whatever Brother Bartholomew may say.
I am so glad to have your friends here, not only as an escort to you,
but also as witnesses to what I am about to do and say. The three of us
can show a bold front to Brother Bartholomew. But let us have no
outsiders,—no police or officials. We can settle everything
satisfactorily among ourselves, without any interference. Nothing would
annoy Brother Bartholomew more than any publicity.” He sat down upon a
low settee and blinked at us inquiringly with his weak, watery blue
eyes.

“For my part,” said Holmes, “whatever you may choose to say will go no
further.”

I nodded to show my agreement.

“That is well! That is well!” said he. “May I offer you a glass of
Chianti, Miss Morstan? Or of Tokay? I keep no other wines. Shall I open
a flask? No? Well, then, I trust that you have no objection to
tobacco-smoke, to the mild balsamic odour of the Eastern tobacco. I am
a little nervous, and I find my hookah an invaluable sedative.” He
applied a taper to the great bowl, and the smoke bubbled merrily
through the rose-water. We sat all three in a semi-circle, with our
heads advanced, and our chins upon our hands, while the strange, jerky
little fellow, with his high, shining head, puffed uneasily in the
centre.

“When I first determined to make this communication to you,” said he,
“I might have given you my address, but I feared that you might
disregard my request and bring unpleasant people with you. I took the
liberty, therefore, of making an appointment in such a way that my man
Williams might be able to see you first. I have complete confidence in
his discretion, and he had orders, if he were dissatisfied, to proceed
no further in the matter. You will excuse these precautions, but I am a
man of somewhat retiring, and I might even say refined, tastes, and
there is nothing more unæsthetic than a policeman. I have a natural
shrinking from all forms of rough materialism. I seldom come in contact
with the rough crowd. I live, as you see, with some little atmosphere
of elegance around me. I may call myself a patron of the arts. It is my
weakness. The landscape is a genuine Corot, and, though a connoisseur
might perhaps throw a doubt upon that Salvator Rosa, there cannot be
the least question about the Bouguereau. I am partial to the modern
French school.”

“You will excuse me, Mr. Sholto,” said Miss Morstan, “but I am here at
your request to learn something which you desire to tell me. It is very
late, and I should desire the interview to be as short as possible.”

“At the best it must take some time,” he answered; “for we shall
certainly have to go to Norwood and see Brother Bartholomew. We shall
all go and try if we can get the better of Brother Bartholomew. He is
very angry with me for taking the course which has seemed right to me.
I had quite high words with him last night. You cannot imagine what a
terrible fellow he is when he is angry.”

“If we are to go to Norwood it would perhaps be as well to start at
once,” I ventured to remark.

He laughed until his ears were quite red. “That would hardly do,” he
cried. “I don’t know what he would say if I brought you in that sudden
way. No, I must prepare you by showing you how we all stand to each
other. In the first place, I must tell you that there are several
points in the story of which I am myself ignorant. I can only lay the
facts before you as far as I know them myself.

“My father was, as you may have guessed, Major John Sholto, once of the
Indian army. He retired some eleven years ago, and came to live at
Pondicherry Lodge in Upper Norwood. He had prospered in India, and
brought back with him a considerable sum of money, a large collection
of valuable curiosities, and a staff of native servants. With these
advantages he bought himself a house, and lived in great luxury. My
twin-brother Bartholomew and I were the only children.

“I very well remember the sensation which was caused by the
disappearance of Captain Morstan. We read the details in the papers,
and, knowing that he had been a friend of our father’s, we discussed
the case freely in his presence. He used to join in our speculations as
to what could have happened. Never for an instant did we suspect that
he had the whole secret hidden in his own breast,—that of all men he
alone knew the fate of Arthur Morstan.

“We did know, however, that some mystery—some positive danger—overhung
our father. He was very fearful of going out alone, and he always
employed two prize-fighters to act as porters at Pondicherry Lodge.
Williams, who drove you to-night, was one of them. He was once
light-weight champion of England. Our father would never tell us what
it was he feared, but he had a most marked aversion to men with wooden
legs. On one occasion he actually fired his revolver at a wooden-legged
man, who proved to be a harmless tradesman canvassing for orders. We
had to pay a large sum to hush the matter up. My brother and I used to
think this a mere whim of my father’s, but events have since led us to
change our opinion.

“Early in 1882 my father received a letter from India which was a great
shock to him. He nearly fainted at the breakfast-table when he opened
it, and from that day he sickened to his death. What was in the letter
we could never discover, but I could see as he held it that it was
short and written in a scrawling hand. He had suffered for years from
an enlarged spleen, but he now became rapidly worse, and towards the
end of April we were informed that he was beyond all hope, and that he
wished to make a last communication to us.

“When we entered his room he was propped up with pillows and breathing
heavily. He besought us to lock the door and to come upon either side
of the bed. Then, grasping our hands, he made a remarkable statement to
us, in a voice which was broken as much by emotion as by pain. I shall
try and give it to you in his own very words.

“‘I have only one thing,’ he said, ‘which weighs upon my mind at this
supreme moment. It is my treatment of poor Morstan’s orphan. The cursed
greed which has been my besetting sin through life has withheld from
her the treasure, half at least of which should have been hers. And yet
I have made no use of it myself,—so blind and foolish a thing is
avarice. The mere feeling of possession has been so dear to me that I
could not bear to share it with another. See that chaplet dipped with
pearls beside the quinine-bottle. Even that I could not bear to part
with, although I had got it out with the design of sending it to her.
You, my sons, will give her a fair share of the Agra treasure. But send
her nothing—not even the chaplet—until I am gone. After all, men have
been as bad as this and have recovered.

“‘I will tell you how Morstan died,’ he continued. ‘He had suffered for
years from a weak heart, but he concealed it from every one. I alone
knew it. When in India, he and I, through a remarkable chain of
circumstances, came into possession of a considerable treasure. I
brought it over to England, and on the night of Morstan’s arrival he
came straight over here to claim his share. He walked over from the
station, and was admitted by my faithful old Lal Chowdar, who is now
dead. Morstan and I had a difference of opinion as to the division of
the treasure, and we came to heated words. Morstan had sprung out of
his chair in a paroxysm of anger, when he suddenly pressed his hand to
his side, his face turned a dusky hue, and he fell backwards, cutting
his head against the corner of the treasure-chest. When I stooped over
him I found, to my horror, that he was dead.

“‘For a long time I sat half distracted, wondering what I should do. My
first impulse was, of course, to call for assistance; but I could not
but recognise that there was every chance that I would be accused of
his murder. His death at the moment of a quarrel, and the gash in his
head, would be black against me. Again, an official inquiry could not
be made without bringing out some facts about the treasure, which I was
particularly anxious to keep secret. He had told me that no soul upon
earth knew where he had gone. There seemed to be no necessity why any
soul ever should know.

“‘I was still pondering over the matter, when, looking up, I saw my
servant, Lal Chowdar, in the doorway. He stole in and bolted the door
behind him. “Do not fear, Sahib,” he said. “No one need know that you
have killed him. Let us hide him away, and who is the wiser?” “I did
not kill him,” said I. Lal Chowdar shook his head and smiled. “I heard
it all, Sahib,” said he. “I heard you quarrel, and I heard the blow.
But my lips are sealed. All are asleep in the house. Let us put him
away together.” That was enough to decide me. If my own servant could
not believe my innocence, how could I hope to make it good before
twelve foolish tradesmen in a jury-box? Lal Chowdar and I disposed of
the body that night, and within a few days the London papers were full
of the mysterious disappearance of Captain Morstan. You will see from
what I say that I can hardly be blamed in the matter. My fault lies in
the fact that we concealed not only the body, but also the treasure,
and that I have clung to Morstan’s share as well as to my own. I wish
you, therefore, to make restitution. Put your ears down to my mouth.
The treasure is hidden in—’

“At this instant a horrible change came over his expression; his eyes
stared wildly, his jaw dropped, and he yelled, in a voice which I can
never forget, ‘Keep him out! For Christ’s sake keep him out!’ We both
stared round at the window behind us upon which his gaze was fixed. A
face was looking in at us out of the darkness. We could see the
whitening of the nose where it was pressed against the glass. It was a
bearded, hairy face, with wild cruel eyes and an expression of
concentrated malevolence. My brother and I rushed towards the window,
but the man was gone. When we returned to my father his head had
dropped and his pulse had ceased to beat.

“We searched the garden that night, but found no sign of the intruder,
save that just under the window a single footmark was visible in the
flower-bed. But for that one trace, we might have thought that our
imaginations had conjured up that wild, fierce face. We soon, however,
had another and a more striking proof that there were secret agencies
at work all round us. The window of my father’s room was found open in
the morning, his cupboards and boxes had been rifled, and upon his
chest was fixed a torn piece of paper, with the words ‘The sign of the
four’ scrawled across it. What the phrase meant, or who our secret
visitor may have been, we never knew. As far as we can judge, none of
my father’s property had been actually stolen, though everything had
been turned out. My brother and I naturally associated this peculiar
incident with the fear which haunted my father during his life; but it
is still a complete mystery to us.”

The little man stopped to relight his hookah and puffed thoughtfully
for a few moments. We had all sat absorbed, listening to his
extraordinary narrative. At the short account of her father’s death
Miss Morstan had turned deadly white, and for a moment I feared that
she was about to faint. She rallied however, on drinking a glass of
water which I quietly poured out for her from a Venetian carafe upon
the side-table. Sherlock Holmes leaned back in his chair with an
abstracted expression and the lids drawn low over his glittering eyes.
As I glanced at him I could not but think how on that very day he had
complained bitterly of the commonplaceness of life. Here at least was a
problem which would tax his sagacity to the utmost. Mr. Thaddeus Sholto
looked from one to the other of us with an obvious pride at the effect
which his story had produced, and then continued between the puffs of
his overgrown pipe.

“My brother and I,” said he, “were, as you may imagine, much excited as
to the treasure which my father had spoken of. For weeks and for months
we dug and delved in every part of the garden, without discovering its
whereabouts. It was maddening to think that the hiding-place was on his
very lips at the moment that he died. We could judge the splendour of
the missing riches by the chaplet which he had taken out. Over this
chaplet my brother Bartholomew and I had some little discussion. The
pearls were evidently of great value, and he was averse to part with
them, for, between friends, my brother was himself a little inclined to
my father’s fault. He thought, too, that if we parted with the chaplet
it might give rise to gossip and finally bring us into trouble. It was
all that I could do to persuade him to let me find out Miss Morstan’s
address and send her a detached pearl at fixed intervals, so that at
least she might never feel destitute.”

“It was a kindly thought,” said our companion, earnestly. “It was
extremely good of you.”

The little man waved his hand deprecatingly. “We were your trustees,”
he said. “That was the view which I took of it, though Brother
Bartholomew could not altogether see it in that light. We had plenty of
money ourselves. I desired no more. Besides, it would have been such
bad taste to have treated a young lady in so scurvy a fashion. ‘Le
mauvais goût mène au crime.’ The French have a very neat way of putting
these things. Our difference of opinion on this subject went so far
that I thought it best to set up rooms for myself: so I left
Pondicherry Lodge, taking the old khitmutgar and Williams with me.
Yesterday, however, I learn that an event of extreme importance has
occurred. The treasure has been discovered. I instantly communicated
with Miss Morstan, and it only remains for us to drive out to Norwood
and demand our share. I explained my views last night to Brother
Bartholomew: so we shall be expected, if not welcome, visitors.”

Mr. Thaddeus Sholto ceased, and sat twitching on his luxurious settee.
We all remained silent, with our thoughts upon the new development
which the mysterious business had taken. Holmes was the first to spring
to his feet.

“You have done well, sir, from first to last,” said he. “It is possible
that we may be able to make you some small return by throwing some
light upon that which is still dark to you. But, as Miss Morstan
remarked just now, it is late, and we had best put the matter through
without delay.”

Our new acquaintance very deliberately coiled up the tube of his
hookah, and produced from behind a curtain a very long befrogged
topcoat with Astrakhan collar and cuffs. This he buttoned tightly up,
in spite of the extreme closeness of the night, and finished his attire
by putting on a rabbit-skin cap with hanging lappets which covered the
ears, so that no part of him was visible save his mobile and peaky
face. “My health is somewhat fragile,” he remarked, as he led the way
down the passage. “I am compelled to be a valetudinarian.”

Our cab was awaiting us outside, and our programme was evidently
prearranged, for the driver started off at once at a rapid pace.
Thaddeus Sholto talked incessantly, in a voice which rose high above
the rattle of the wheels.

“Bartholomew is a clever fellow,” said he. “How do you think he found
out where the treasure was? He had come to the conclusion that it was
somewhere indoors: so he worked out all the cubic space of the house,
and made measurements everywhere, so that not one inch should be
unaccounted for. Among other things, he found that the height of the
building was seventy-four feet, but on adding together the heights of
all the separate rooms, and making every allowance for the space
between, which he ascertained by borings, he could not bring the total
to more than seventy feet. There were four feet unaccounted for. These
could only be at the top of the building. He knocked a hole, therefore,
in the lath-and-plaster ceiling of the highest room, and there, sure
enough, he came upon another little garret above it, which had been
sealed up and was known to no one. In the centre stood the
treasure-chest, resting upon two rafters. He lowered it through the
hole, and there it lies. He computes the value of the jewels at not
less than half a million sterling.”

At the mention of this gigantic sum we all stared at one another
open-eyed. Miss Morstan, could we secure her rights, would change from
a needy governess to the richest heiress in England. Surely it was the
place of a loyal friend to rejoice at such news; yet I am ashamed to
say that selfishness took me by the soul, and that my heart turned as
heavy as lead within me. I stammered out some few halting words of
congratulation, and then sat downcast, with my head drooped, deaf to
the babble of our new acquaintance. He was clearly a confirmed
hypochondriac, and I was dreamily conscious that he was pouring forth
interminable trains of symptoms, and imploring information as to the
composition and action of innumerable quack nostrums, some of which he
bore about in a leather case in his pocket. I trust that he may not
remember any of the answers which I gave him that night. Holmes
declares that he overheard me caution him against the great danger of
taking more than two drops of castor oil, while I recommended
strychnine in large doses as a sedative. However that may be, I was
certainly relieved when our cab pulled up with a jerk and the coachman
sprang down to open the door.

“This, Miss Morstan, is Pondicherry Lodge,” said Mr. Thaddeus Sholto,
as he handed her out.




Chapter V
The Tragedy of Pondicherry Lodge


It was nearly eleven o’clock when we reached this final stage of our
night’s adventures. We had left the damp fog of the great city behind
us, and the night was fairly fine. A warm wind blew from the westward,
and heavy clouds moved slowly across the sky, with half a moon peeping
occasionally through the rifts. It was clear enough to see for some
distance, but Thaddeus Sholto took down one of the side-lamps from the
carriage to give us a better light upon our way.

Pondicherry Lodge stood in its own grounds, and was girt round with a
very high stone wall topped with broken glass. A single narrow
iron-clamped door formed the only means of entrance. On this our guide
knocked with a peculiar postman-like rat-tat.

“Who is there?” cried a gruff voice from within.

“It is I, McMurdo. You surely know my knock by this time.”

There was a grumbling sound and a clanking and jarring of keys. The
door swung heavily back, and a short, deep-chested man stood in the
opening, with the yellow light of the lantern shining upon his
protruded face and twinkling distrustful eyes.

“That you, Mr. Thaddeus? But who are the others? I had no orders about
them from the master.”

“No, McMurdo? You surprise me! I told my brother last night that I
should bring some friends.”

“He ain’t been out o’ his room to-day, Mr. Thaddeus, and I have no
orders. You know very well that I must stick to regulations. I can let
you in, but your friends must just stop where they are.”

This was an unexpected obstacle. Thaddeus Sholto looked about him in a
perplexed and helpless manner. “This is too bad of you, McMurdo!” he
said. “If I guarantee them, that is enough for you. There is the young
lady, too. She cannot wait on the public road at this hour.”

“Very sorry, Mr. Thaddeus,” said the porter, inexorably. “Folk may be
friends o’ yours, and yet no friends o’ the master’s. He pays me well
to do my duty, and my duty I’ll do. I don’t know none o’ your friends.”

“Oh, yes you do, McMurdo,” cried Sherlock Holmes, genially. “I don’t
think you can have forgotten me. Don’t you remember the amateur who
fought three rounds with you at Alison’s rooms on the night of your
benefit four years back?”

“Not Mr. Sherlock Holmes!” roared the prize-fighter. “God’s truth! how
could I have mistook you? If instead o’ standin’ there so quiet you had
just stepped up and given me that cross-hit of yours under the jaw, I’d
ha’ known you without a question. Ah, you’re one that has wasted your
gifts, you have! You might have aimed high, if you had joined the
fancy.”

“You see, Watson, if all else fails me I have still one of the
scientific professions open to me,” said Holmes, laughing. “Our friend
won’t keep us out in the cold now, I am sure.”

“In you come, sir, in you come,—you and your friends,” he answered.
“Very sorry, Mr. Thaddeus, but orders are very strict. Had to be
certain of your friends before I let them in.”

Inside, a gravel path wound through desolate grounds to a huge clump of
a house, square and prosaic, all plunged in shadow save where a
moonbeam struck one corner and glimmered in a garret window. The vast
size of the building, with its gloom and its deathly silence, struck a
chill to the heart. Even Thaddeus Sholto seemed ill at ease, and the
lantern quivered and rattled in his hand.

“I cannot understand it,” he said. “There must be some mistake. I
distinctly told Bartholomew that we should be here, and yet there is no
light in his window. I do not know what to make of it.”

“Does he always guard the premises in this way?” asked Holmes.

“Yes; he has followed my father’s custom. He was the favourite son, you
know, and I sometimes think that my father may have told him more than
he ever told me. That is Bartholomew’s window up there where the
moonshine strikes. It is quite bright, but there is no light from
within, I think.”

“None,” said Holmes. “But I see the glint of a light in that little
window beside the door.”

“Ah, that is the housekeeper’s room. That is where old Mrs. Bernstone
sits. She can tell us all about it. But perhaps you would not mind
waiting here for a minute or two, for if we all go in together and she
has no word of our coming she may be alarmed. But hush! what is that?”

He held up the lantern, and his hand shook until the circles of light
flickered and wavered all round us. Miss Morstan seized my wrist, and
we all stood with thumping hearts, straining our ears. From the great
black house there sounded through the silent night the saddest and most
pitiful of sounds,—the shrill, broken whimpering of a frightened woman.

“It is Mrs. Bernstone,” said Sholto. “She is the only woman in the
house. Wait here. I shall be back in a moment.” He hurried for the
door, and knocked in his peculiar way. We could see a tall old woman
admit him, and sway with pleasure at the very sight of him.

“Oh, Mr. Thaddeus, sir, I am so glad you have come! I am so glad you
have come, Mr. Thaddeus, sir!” We heard her reiterated rejoicings until
the door was closed and her voice died away into a muffled monotone.

Our guide had left us the lantern. Holmes swung it slowly round, and
peered keenly at the house, and at the great rubbish-heaps which
cumbered the grounds. Miss Morstan and I stood together, and her hand
was in mine. A wondrous subtle thing is love, for here were we two who
had never seen each other before that day, between whom no word or even
look of affection had ever passed, and yet now in an hour of trouble
our hands instinctively sought for each other. I have marvelled at it
since, but at the time it seemed the most natural thing that I should
go out to her so, and, as she has often told me, there was in her also
the instinct to turn to me for comfort and protection. So we stood hand
in hand, like two children, and there was peace in our hearts for all
the dark things that surrounded us.

“What a strange place!” she said, looking round.

“It looks as though all the moles in England had been let loose in it.
I have seen something of the sort on the side of a hill near Ballarat,
where the prospectors had been at work.”

“And from the same cause,” said Holmes. “These are the traces of the
treasure-seekers. You must remember that they were six years looking
for it. No wonder that the grounds look like a gravel-pit.”

At that moment the door of the house burst open, and Thaddeus Sholto
came running out, with his hands thrown forward and terror in his eyes.

“There is something amiss with Bartholomew!” he cried. “I am
frightened! My nerves cannot stand it.” He was, indeed, half blubbering
with fear, and his twitching feeble face peeping out from the great
Astrakhan collar had the helpless appealing expression of a terrified
child.

“Come into the house,” said Holmes, in his crisp, firm way.

“Yes, do!” pleaded Thaddeus Sholto. “I really do not feel equal to
giving directions.”

We all followed him into the housekeeper’s room, which stood upon the
left-hand side of the passage. The old woman was pacing up and down
with a scared look and restless picking fingers, but the sight of Miss
Morstan appeared to have a soothing effect upon her.

“God bless your sweet calm face!” she cried, with an hysterical sob.
“It does me good to see you. Oh, but I have been sorely tried this
day!”

Our companion patted her thin, work-worn hand, and murmured some few
words of kindly womanly comfort which brought the colour back into the
other’s bloodless cheeks.

“Master has locked himself in and will not answer me,” she explained.
“All day I have waited to hear from him, for he often likes to be
alone; but an hour ago I feared that something was amiss, so I went up
and peeped through the key-hole. You must go up, Mr. Thaddeus,—you must
go up and look for yourself. I have seen Mr. Bartholomew Sholto in joy
and in sorrow for ten long years, but I never saw him with such a face
on him as that.”

Sherlock Holmes took the lamp and led the way, for Thaddeus Sholto’s
teeth were chattering in his head. So shaken was he that I had to pass
my hand under his arm as we went up the stairs, for his knees were
trembling under him. Twice as we ascended Holmes whipped his lens out
of his pocket and carefully examined marks which appeared to me to be
mere shapeless smudges of dust upon the cocoa-nut matting which served
as a stair-carpet. He walked slowly from step to step, holding the
lamp, and shooting keen glances to right and left. Miss Morstan had
remained behind with the frightened housekeeper.

The third flight of stairs ended in a straight passage of some length,
with a great picture in Indian tapestry upon the right of it and three
doors upon the left. Holmes advanced along it in the same slow and
methodical way, while we kept close at his heels, with our long black
shadows streaming backwards down the corridor. The third door was that
which we were seeking. Holmes knocked without receiving any answer, and
then tried to turn the handle and force it open. It was locked on the
inside, however, and by a broad and powerful bolt, as we could see when
we set our lamp up against it. The key being turned, however, the hole
was not entirely closed. Sherlock Holmes bent down to it, and instantly
rose again with a sharp intaking of the breath.

“There is something devilish in this, Watson,” said he, more moved than
I had ever before seen him. “What do you make of it?”

I stooped to the hole, and recoiled in horror. Moonlight was streaming
into the room, and it was bright with a vague and shifty radiance.
Looking straight at me, and suspended, as it were, in the air, for all
beneath was in shadow, there hung a face,—the very face of our
companion Thaddeus. There was the same high, shining head, the same
circular bristle of red hair, the same bloodless countenance. The
features were set, however, in a horrible smile, a fixed and unnatural
grin, which in that still and moonlit room was more jarring to the
nerves than any scowl or contortion. So like was the face to that of
our little friend that I looked round at him to make sure that he was
indeed with us. Then I recalled to mind that he had mentioned to us
that his brother and he were twins.

“This is terrible!” I said to Holmes. “What is to be done?”

“The door must come down,” he answered, and, springing against it, he
put all his weight upon the lock. It creaked and groaned, but did not
yield. Together we flung ourselves upon it once more, and this time it
gave way with a sudden snap, and we found ourselves within Bartholomew
Sholto’s chamber.

It appeared to have been fitted up as a chemical laboratory. A double
line of glass-stoppered bottles was drawn up upon the wall opposite the
door, and the table was littered over with Bunsen burners, test-tubes,
and retorts. In the corners stood carboys of acid in wicker baskets.
One of these appeared to leak or to have been broken, for a stream of
dark-coloured liquid had trickled out from it, and the air was heavy
with a peculiarly pungent, tar-like odour. A set of steps stood at one
side of the room, in the midst of a litter of lath and plaster, and
above them there was an opening in the ceiling large enough for a man
to pass through. At the foot of the steps a long coil of rope was
thrown carelessly together.

By the table, in a wooden arm-chair, the master of the house was seated
all in a heap, with his head sunk upon his left shoulder, and that
ghastly, inscrutable smile upon his face. He was stiff and cold, and
had clearly been dead many hours. It seemed to me that not only his
features but all his limbs were twisted and turned in the most
fantastic fashion. By his hand upon the table there lay a peculiar
instrument,—a brown, close-grained stick, with a stone head like a
hammer, rudely lashed on with coarse twine. Beside it was a torn sheet
of note-paper with some words scrawled upon it. Holmes glanced at it,
and then handed it to me.

“You see,” he said, with a significant raising of the eyebrows.

In the light of the lantern I read, with a thrill of horror, “The sign
of the four.”

“In God’s name, what does it all mean?” I asked.

“It means murder,” said he, stooping over the dead man. “Ah, I expected
it. Look here!” He pointed to what looked like a long, dark thorn stuck
in the skin just above the ear.

“It looks like a thorn,” said I.

“It is a thorn. You may pick it out. But be careful, for it is
poisoned.”

I took it up between my finger and thumb. It came away from the skin so
readily that hardly any mark was left behind. One tiny speck of blood
showed where the puncture had been.

“This is all an insoluble mystery to me,” said I. “It grows darker
instead of clearer.”

“On the contrary,” he answered, “it clears every instant. I only
require a few missing links to have an entirely connected case.”

We had almost forgotten our companion’s presence since we entered the
chamber. He was still standing in the doorway, the very picture of
terror, wringing his hands and moaning to himself. Suddenly, however,
he broke out into a sharp, querulous cry.

“The treasure is gone!” he said. “They have robbed him of the treasure!
There is the hole through which we lowered it. I helped him to do it! I
was the last person who saw him! I left him here last night, and I
heard him lock the door as I came downstairs.”

“What time was that?”

“It was ten o’clock. And now he is dead, and the police will be called
in, and I shall be suspected of having had a hand in it. Oh, yes, I am
sure I shall. But you don’t think so, gentlemen? Surely you don’t think
that it was I? Is it likely that I would have brought you here if it
were I? Oh, dear! oh, dear! I know that I shall go mad!” He jerked his
arms and stamped his feet in a kind of convulsive frenzy.

“You have no reason for fear, Mr. Sholto,” said Holmes, kindly, putting
his hand upon his shoulder. “Take my advice, and drive down to the
station to report this matter to the police. Offer to assist them in
every way. We shall wait here until your return.”

The little man obeyed in a half-stupefied fashion, and we heard him
stumbling down the stairs in the dark.




Chapter VI
Sherlock Holmes Gives a Demonstration


“Now, Watson,” said Holmes, rubbing his hands, “we have half an hour to
ourselves. Let us make good use of it. My case is, as I have told you,
almost complete; but we must not err on the side of over-confidence.
Simple as the case seems now, there may be something deeper underlying
it.”

“Simple!” I ejaculated.

“Surely,” said he, with something of the air of a clinical professor
expounding to his class. “Just sit in the corner there, that your
footprints may not complicate matters. Now to work! In the first place,
how did these folk come, and how did they go? The door has not been
opened since last night. How of the window?” He carried the lamp across
to it, muttering his observations aloud the while, but addressing them
to himself rather than to me. “Window is snibbed on the inner side.
Framework is solid. No hinges at the side. Let us open it. No
water-pipe near. Roof quite out of reach. Yet a man has mounted by the
window. It rained a little last night. Here is the print of a foot in
mould upon the sill. And here is a circular muddy mark, and here again
upon the floor, and here again by the table. See here, Watson! This is
really a very pretty demonstration.”

I looked at the round, well-defined muddy discs. “This is not a
footmark,” said I.

“It is something much more valuable to us. It is the impression of a
wooden stump. You see here on the sill is the boot-mark, a heavy boot
with the broad metal heel, and beside it is the mark of the
timber-toe.”

“It is the wooden-legged man.”

“Quite so. But there has been some one else,—a very able and efficient
ally. Could you scale that wall, doctor?”

I looked out of the open window. The moon still shone brightly on that
angle of the house. We were a good sixty feet from the ground, and,
look where I would, I could see no foothold, nor as much as a crevice
in the brick-work.

“It is absolutely impossible,” I answered.

“Without aid it is so. But suppose you had a friend up here who lowered
you this good stout rope which I see in the corner, securing one end of
it to this great hook in the wall. Then, I think, if you were an active
man, You might swarm up, wooden leg and all. You would depart, of
course, in the same fashion, and your ally would draw up the rope,
untie it from the hook, shut the window, snib it on the inside, and get
away in the way that he originally came. As a minor point it may be
noted,” he continued, fingering the rope, “that our wooden-legged
friend, though a fair climber, was not a professional sailor. His hands
were far from horny. My lens discloses more than one blood-mark,
especially towards the end of the rope, from which I gather that he
slipped down with such velocity that he took the skin off his hand.”

“This is all very well,” said I, “but the thing becomes more
unintelligible than ever. How about this mysterious ally? How came he
into the room?”

“Yes, the ally!” repeated Holmes, pensively. “There are features of
interest about this ally. He lifts the case from the regions of the
commonplace. I fancy that this ally breaks fresh ground in the annals
of crime in this country,—though parallel cases suggest themselves from
India, and, if my memory serves me, from Senegambia.”

“How came he, then?” I reiterated. “The door is locked, the window is
inaccessible. Was it through the chimney?”

“The grate is much too small,” he answered. “I had already considered
that possibility.”

“How then?” I persisted.

“You will not apply my precept,” he said, shaking his head. “How often
have I said to you that when you have eliminated the impossible
whatever remains, _however improbable_, must be the truth? We know that
he did not come through the door, the window, or the chimney. We also
know that he could not have been concealed in the room, as there is no
concealment possible. Whence, then, did he come?”

“He came through the hole in the roof,” I cried.

“Of course he did. He must have done so. If you will have the kindness
to hold the lamp for me, we shall now extend our researches to the room
above,—the secret room in which the treasure was found.”

He mounted the steps, and, seizing a rafter with either hand, he swung
himself up into the garret. Then, lying on his face, he reached down
for the lamp and held it while I followed him.

The chamber in which we found ourselves was about ten feet one way and
six the other. The floor was formed by the rafters, with thin
lath-and-plaster between, so that in walking one had to step from beam
to beam. The roof ran up to an apex, and was evidently the inner shell
of the true roof of the house. There was no furniture of any sort, and
the accumulated dust of years lay thick upon the floor.

“Here you are, you see,” said Sherlock Holmes, putting his hand against
the sloping wall. “This is a trap-door which leads out on to the roof.
I can press it back, and here is the roof itself, sloping at a gentle
angle. This, then, is the way by which Number One entered. Let us see
if we can find any other traces of his individuality.”

He held down the lamp to the floor, and as he did so I saw for the
second time that night a startled, surprised look come over his face.
For myself, as I followed his gaze my skin was cold under my clothes.
The floor was covered thickly with the prints of a naked foot,—clear,
well defined, perfectly formed, but scarce half the size of those of an
ordinary man.

“Holmes,” I said, in a whisper, “a child has done the horrid thing.”

He had recovered his self-possession in an instant. “I was staggered
for the moment,” he said, “but the thing is quite natural. My memory
failed me, or I should have been able to foretell it. There is nothing
more to be learned here. Let us go down.”

“What is your theory, then, as to those footmarks?” I asked, eagerly,
when we had regained the lower room once more.

“My dear Watson, try a little analysis yourself,” said he, with a touch
of impatience. “You know my methods. Apply them, and it will be
instructive to compare results.”

“I cannot conceive anything which will cover the facts,” I answered.

“It will be clear enough to you soon,” he said, in an off-hand way. “I
think that there is nothing else of importance here, but I will look.”
He whipped out his lens and a tape measure, and hurried about the room
on his knees, measuring, comparing, examining, with his long thin nose
only a few inches from the planks, and his beady eyes gleaming and
deep-set like those of a bird. So swift, silent, and furtive were his
movements, like those of a trained blood-hound picking out a scent,
that I could not but think what a terrible criminal he would have made
had he turned his energy and sagacity against the law, instead of
exerting them in its defence. As he hunted about, he kept muttering to
himself, and finally he broke out into a loud crow of delight.

“We are certainly in luck,” said he. “We ought to have very little
trouble now. Number One has had the misfortune to tread in the
creosote. You can see the outline of the edge of his small foot here at
the side of this evil-smelling mess. The carboy has been cracked, You
see, and the stuff has leaked out.”

“What then?” I asked.

“Why, we have got him, that’s all,” said he. “I know a dog that would
follow that scent to the world’s end. If a pack can track a trailed
herring across a shire, how far can a specially-trained hound follow so
pungent a smell as this? It sounds like a sum in the rule of three. The
answer should give us the—But halloa! here are the accredited
representatives of the law.”

Heavy steps and the clamour of loud voices were audible from below, and
the hall door shut with a loud crash.

“Before they come,” said Holmes, “just put your hand here on this poor
fellow’s arm, and here on his leg. What do you feel?”

“The muscles are as hard as a board,” I answered.

“Quite so. They are in a state of extreme contraction, far exceeding
the usual _rigor mortis_. Coupled with this distortion of the face,
this Hippocratic smile, or ‘_risus sardonicus_,’ as the old writers
called it, what conclusion would it suggest to your mind?”

“Death from some powerful vegetable alkaloid,” I answered,—“some
strychnine-like substance which would produce tetanus.”

“That was the idea which occurred to me the instant I saw the drawn
muscles of the face. On getting into the room I at once looked for the
means by which the poison had entered the system. As you saw, I
discovered a thorn which had been driven or shot with no great force
into the scalp. You observe that the part struck was that which would
be turned towards the hole in the ceiling if the man were erect in his
chair. Now examine the thorn.”

I took it up gingerly and held it in the light of the lantern. It was
long, sharp, and black, with a glazed look near the point as though
some gummy substance had dried upon it. The blunt end had been trimmed
and rounded off with a knife.

“Is that an English thorn?” he asked.

“No, it certainly is not.”

“With all these data you should be able to draw some just inference.
But here are the regulars; so the auxiliary forces may beat a retreat.”

As he spoke, the steps which had been coming nearer sounded loudly on
the passage, and a very stout, portly man in a grey suit strode heavily
into the room. He was red-faced, burly and plethoric, with a pair of
very small twinkling eyes which looked keenly out from between swollen
and puffy pouches. He was closely followed by an inspector in uniform,
and by the still palpitating Thaddeus Sholto.

“Here’s a business!” he cried, in a muffled, husky voice. “Here’s a
pretty business! But who are all these? Why, the house seems to be as
full as a rabbit-warren!”

“I think you must recollect me, Mr. Athelney Jones,” said Holmes,
quietly.

“Why, of course I do!” he wheezed. “It’s Mr. Sherlock Holmes, the
theorist. Remember you! I’ll never forget how you lectured us all on
causes and inferences and effects in the Bishopgate jewel case. It’s
true you set us on the right track; but you’ll own now that it was more
by good luck than good guidance.”

“It was a piece of very simple reasoning.”

“Oh, come, now, come! Never be ashamed to own up. But what is all this?
Bad business! Bad business! Stern facts here,—no room for theories. How
lucky that I happened to be out at Norwood over another case! I was at
the station when the message arrived. What d’you think the man died
of?”

“Oh, this is hardly a case for me to theorise over,” said Holmes,
dryly.

“No, no. Still, we can’t deny that you hit the nail on the head
sometimes. Dear me! Door locked, I understand. Jewels worth half a
million missing. How was the window?”

“Fastened; but there are steps on the sill.”

“Well, well, if it was fastened the steps could have nothing to do with
the matter. That’s common sense. Man might have died in a fit; but then
the jewels are missing. Ha! I have a theory. These flashes come upon me
at times.—Just step outside, sergeant, and you, Mr. Sholto. Your friend
can remain.—What do you think of this, Holmes? Sholto was, on his own
confession, with his brother last night. The brother died in a fit, on
which Sholto walked off with the treasure. How’s that?”

“On which the dead man very considerately got up and locked the door on
the inside.”

“Hum! There’s a flaw there. Let us apply common sense to the matter.
This Thaddeus Sholto _was_ with his brother; there _was_ a quarrel; so
much we know. The brother is dead and the jewels are gone. So much also
we know. No one saw the brother from the time Thaddeus left him. His
bed had not been slept in. Thaddeus is evidently in a most disturbed
state of mind. His appearance is—well, not attractive. You see that I
am weaving my web round Thaddeus. The net begins to close upon him.”

“You are not quite in possession of the facts yet,” said Holmes. “This
splinter of wood, which I have every reason to believe to be poisoned,
was in the man’s scalp where you still see the mark; this card,
inscribed as you see it, was on the table; and beside it lay this
rather curious stone-headed instrument. How does all that fit into your
theory?”

“Confirms it in every respect,” said the fat detective, pompously.
“House is full of Indian curiosities. Thaddeus brought this up, and if
this splinter be poisonous Thaddeus may as well have made murderous use
of it as any other man. The card is some hocus-pocus,—a blind, as like
as not. The only question is, how did he depart? Ah, of course, here is
a hole in the roof.” With great activity, considering his bulk, he
sprang up the steps and squeezed through into the garret, and
immediately afterwards we heard his exulting voice proclaiming that he
had found the trap-door.

“He can find something,” remarked Holmes, shrugging his shoulders. “He
has occasional glimmerings of reason. _Il n’y a pas des sots si
incommodes que ceux qui ont de l’esprit!_”

“You see!” said Athelney Jones, reappearing down the steps again.
“Facts are better than mere theories, after all. My view of the case is
confirmed. There is a trap-door communicating with the roof, and it is
partly open.”

“It was I who opened it.”

“Oh, indeed! You did notice it, then?” He seemed a little crestfallen
at the discovery. “Well, whoever noticed it, it shows how our gentleman
got away. Inspector!”

“Yes, sir,” from the passage.

“Ask Mr. Sholto to step this way.—Mr. Sholto, it is my duty to inform
you that anything which you may say will be used against you. I arrest
you in the Queen’s name as being concerned in the death of your
brother.”

“There, now! Didn’t I tell you!” cried the poor little man, throwing
out his hands, and looking from one to the other of us.

“Don’t trouble yourself about it, Mr. Sholto,” said Holmes. “I think
that I can engage to clear you of the charge.”

“Don’t promise too much, Mr. Theorist,—don’t promise too much!” snapped
the detective. “You may find it a harder matter than you think.”

“Not only will I clear him, Mr. Jones, but I will make you a free
present of the name and description of one of the two people who were
in this room last night. His name, I have every reason to believe, is
Jonathan Small. He is a poorly-educated man, small, active, with his
right leg off, and wearing a wooden stump which is worn away upon the
inner side. His left boot has a coarse, square-toed sole, with an iron
band round the heel. He is a middle-aged man, much sunburned, and has
been a convict. These few indications may be of some assistance to you,
coupled with the fact that there is a good deal of skin missing from
the palm of his hand. The other man—”

“Ah! the other man—?” asked Athelney Jones, in a sneering voice, but
impressed none the less, as I could easily see, by the precision of the
other’s manner.

“Is a rather curious person,” said Sherlock Holmes, turning upon his
heel. “I hope before very long to be able to introduce you to the pair
of them.—A word with you, Watson.”

He led me out to the head of the stair. “This unexpected occurrence,”
he said, “has caused us rather to lose sight of the original purpose of
our journey.”

“I have just been thinking so,” I answered. “It is not right that Miss
Morstan should remain in this stricken house.”

“No. You must escort her home. She lives with Mrs. Cecil Forrester, in
Lower Camberwell: so it is not very far. I will wait for you here if
you will drive out again. Or perhaps you are too tired?”

“By no means. I don’t think I could rest until I know more of this
fantastic business. I have seen something of the rough side of life,
but I give you my word that this quick succession of strange surprises
to-night has shaken my nerve completely. I should like, however, to see
the matter through with you, now that I have got so far.”

“Your presence will be of great service to me,” he answered. “We shall
work the case out independently, and leave this fellow Jones to exult
over any mare’s-nest which he may choose to construct. When you have
dropped Miss Morstan I wish you to go on to No. 3, Pinchin Lane, down
near the water’s edge at Lambeth. The third house on the right-hand
side is a bird-stuffer’s: Sherman is the name. You will see a weasel
holding a young rabbit in the window. Knock old Sherman up, and tell
him, with my compliments, that I want Toby at once. You will bring Toby
back in the cab with you.”

“A dog, I suppose.”

“Yes,—a queer mongrel, with a most amazing power of scent. I would
rather have Toby’s help than that of the whole detective force of
London.”

“I shall bring him, then,” said I. “It is one now. I ought to be back
before three, if I can get a fresh horse.”

“And I,” said Holmes, “shall see what I can learn from Mrs. Bernstone,
and from the Indian servant, who, Mr. Thaddeus tell me, sleeps in the
next garret. Then I shall study the great Jones’s methods and listen to
his not too delicate sarcasms. ‘_Wir sind gewohnt dass die Menschen
verhöhnen was sie nicht verstehen._’ Goethe is always pithy.”




Chapter VII
The Episode of the Barrel


The police had brought a cab with them, and in this I escorted Miss
Morstan back to her home. After the angelic fashion of women, she had
borne trouble with a calm face as long as there was some one weaker
than herself to support, and I had found her bright and placid by the
side of the frightened housekeeper. In the cab, however, she first
turned faint, and then burst into a passion of weeping,—so sorely had
she been tried by the adventures of the night. She has told me since
that she thought me cold and distant upon that journey. She little
guessed the struggle within my breast, or the effort of self-restraint
which held me back. My sympathies and my love went out to her, even as
my hand had in the garden. I felt that years of the conventionalities
of life could not teach me to know her sweet, brave nature as had this
one day of strange experiences. Yet there were two thoughts which
sealed the words of affection upon my lips. She was weak and helpless,
shaken in mind and nerve. It was to take her at a disadvantage to
obtrude love upon her at such a time. Worse still, she was rich. If
Holmes’s researches were successful, she would be an heiress. Was it
fair, was it honourable, that a half-pay surgeon should take such
advantage of an intimacy which chance had brought about? Might she not
look upon me as a mere vulgar fortune-seeker? I could not bear to risk
that such a thought should cross her mind. This Agra treasure
intervened like an impassable barrier between us.

It was nearly two o’clock when we reached Mrs. Cecil Forrester’s. The
servants had retired hours ago, but Mrs. Forrester had been so
interested by the strange message which Miss Morstan had received that
she had sat up in the hope of her return. She opened the door herself,
a middle-aged, graceful woman, and it gave me joy to see how tenderly
her arm stole round the other’s waist and how motherly was the voice in
which she greeted her. She was clearly no mere paid dependant, but an
honoured friend. I was introduced, and Mrs. Forrester earnestly begged
me to step in and tell her our adventures. I explained, however, the
importance of my errand, and promised faithfully to call and report any
progress which we might make with the case. As we drove away I stole a
glance back, and I still seem to see that little group on the step, the
two graceful, clinging figures, the half-opened door, the hall-light
shining through stained glass, the barometer, and the bright
stair-rods. It was soothing to catch even that passing glimpse of a
tranquil English home in the midst of the wild, dark business which had
absorbed us.

And the more I thought of what had happened, the wilder and darker it
grew. I reviewed the whole extraordinary sequence of events as I
rattled on through the silent gas-lit streets. There was the original
problem: that at least was pretty clear now. The death of Captain
Morstan, the sending of the pearls, the advertisement, the letter,—we
had had light upon all those events. They had only led us, however, to
a deeper and far more tragic mystery. The Indian treasure, the curious
plan found among Morstan’s baggage, the strange scene at Major Sholto’s
death, the rediscovery of the treasure immediately followed by the
murder of the discoverer, the very singular accompaniments to the
crime, the footsteps, the remarkable weapons, the words upon the card,
corresponding with those upon Captain Morstan’s chart,—here was indeed
a labyrinth in which a man less singularly endowed than my
fellow-lodger might well despair of ever finding the clue.

Pinchin Lane was a row of shabby two-storied brick houses in the lower
quarter of Lambeth. I had to knock for some time at No. 3 before I
could make my impression. At last, however, there was the glint of a
candle behind the blind, and a face looked out at the upper window.

“Go on, you drunken vagabone,” said the face. “If you kick up any more
row I’ll open the kennels and let out forty-three dogs upon you.”

“If you’ll let one out it’s just what I have come for,” said I.

“Go on!” yelled the voice. “So help me gracious, I have a wiper in the
bag, an’ I’ll drop it on your ’ead if you don’t hook it.”

“But I want a dog,” I cried.

“I won’t be argued with!” shouted Mr. Sherman. “Now stand clear, for
when I say ‘three,’ down goes the wiper.”

“Mr. Sherlock Holmes—” I began, but the words had a most magical
effect, for the window instantly slammed down, and within a minute the
door was unbarred and open. Mr. Sherman was a lanky, lean old man, with
stooping shoulders, a stringy neck, and blue-tinted glasses.

“A friend of Mr. Sherlock is always welcome,” said he. “Step in, sir.
Keep clear of the badger; for he bites. Ah, naughty, naughty, would you
take a nip at the gentleman?” This to a stoat which thrust its wicked
head and red eyes between the bars of its cage. “Don’t mind that, sir:
it’s only a slow-worm. It hain’t got no fangs, so I gives it the run o’
the room, for it keeps the beetles down. You must not mind my bein’
just a little short wi’ you at first, for I’m guyed at by the children,
and there’s many a one just comes down this lane to knock me up. What
was it that Mr. Sherlock Holmes wanted, sir?”

“He wanted a dog of yours.”

“Ah! that would be Toby.”

“Yes, Toby was the name.”

“Toby lives at No. 7 on the left here.” He moved slowly forward with
his candle among the queer animal family which he had gathered round
him. In the uncertain, shadowy light I could see dimly that there were
glancing, glimmering eyes peeping down at us from every cranny and
corner. Even the rafters above our heads were lined by solemn fowls,
who lazily shifted their weight from one leg to the other as our voices
disturbed their slumbers.

Toby proved to be an ugly, long-haired, lop-eared creature, half
spaniel and half lurcher, brown-and-white in colour, with a very clumsy
waddling gait. It accepted after some hesitation a lump of sugar which
the old naturalist handed to me, and, having thus sealed an alliance,
it followed me to the cab, and made no difficulties about accompanying
me. It had just struck three on the Palace clock when I found myself
back once more at Pondicherry Lodge. The ex-prize-fighter McMurdo had,
I found, been arrested as an accessory, and both he and Mr. Sholto had
been marched off to the station. Two constables guarded the narrow
gate, but they allowed me to pass with the dog on my mentioning the
detective’s name.

Holmes was standing on the door-step, with his hands in his pockets,
smoking his pipe.

“Ah, you have him there!” said he. “Good dog, then! Athelney Jones has
gone. We have had an immense display of energy since you left. He has
arrested not only friend Thaddeus, but the gatekeeper, the housekeeper,
and the Indian servant. We have the place to ourselves, but for a
sergeant upstairs. Leave the dog here, and come up.”

We tied Toby to the hall table, and re-ascended the stairs. The room
was as he had left it, save that a sheet had been draped over the
central figure. A weary-looking police-sergeant reclined in the corner.

“Lend me your bull’s-eye, sergeant,” said my companion. “Now tie this
bit of card round my neck, so as to hang it in front of me. Thank you.
Now I must kick off my boots and stockings.—Just you carry them down
with you, Watson. I am going to do a little climbing. And dip my
handkerchief into the creasote. That will do. Now come up into the
garret with me for a moment.”

We clambered up through the hole. Holmes turned his light once more
upon the footsteps in the dust.

“I wish you particularly to notice these footmarks,” he said. “Do you
observe anything noteworthy about them?”

“They belong,” I said, “to a child or a small woman.”

“Apart from their size, though. Is there nothing else?”

“They appear to be much as other footmarks.”

“Not at all. Look here! This is the print of a right foot in the dust.
Now I make one with my naked foot beside it. What is the chief
difference?”

“Your toes are all cramped together. The other print has each toe
distinctly divided.”

“Quite so. That is the point. Bear that in mind. Now, would you kindly
step over to that flap-window and smell the edge of the wood-work? I
shall stay here, as I have this handkerchief in my hand.”

I did as he directed, and was instantly conscious of a strong tarry
smell.

“That is where he put his foot in getting out. If _you_ can trace him,
I should think that Toby will have no difficulty. Now run downstairs,
loose the dog, and look out for Blondin.”

By the time that I got out into the grounds Sherlock Holmes was on the
roof, and I could see him like an enormous glow-worm crawling very
slowly along the ridge. I lost sight of him behind a stack of chimneys,
but he presently reappeared, and then vanished once more upon the
opposite side. When I made my way round there I found him seated at one
of the corner eaves.

“That you, Watson?” he cried.

“Yes.”

“This is the place. What is that black thing down there?”

“A water-barrel.”

“Top on it?”

“Yes.”

“No sign of a ladder?”

“No.”

“Confound the fellow! It’s a most break-neck place. I ought to be able
to come down where he could climb up. The water-pipe feels pretty firm.
Here goes, anyhow.”

There was a scuffling of feet, and the lantern began to come steadily
down the side of the wall. Then with a light spring he came on to the
barrel, and from there to the earth.

“It was easy to follow him,” he said, drawing on his stockings and
boots. “Tiles were loosened the whole way along, and in his hurry he
had dropped this. It confirms my diagnosis, as you doctors express it.”

The object which he held up to me was a small pocket or pouch woven out
of coloured grasses and with a few tawdry beads strung round it. In
shape and size it was not unlike a cigarette-case. Inside were half a
dozen spines of dark wood, sharp at one end and rounded at the other,
like that which had struck Bartholomew Sholto.

“They are hellish things,” said he. “Look out that you don’t prick
yourself. I’m delighted to have them, for the chances are that they are
all he has. There is the less fear of you or me finding one in our skin
before long. I would sooner face a Martini bullet, myself. Are you game
for a six-mile trudge, Watson?”

“Certainly,” I answered.

“Your leg will stand it?”

“Oh, yes.”

“Here you are, doggy! Good old Toby! Smell it, Toby, smell it!” He
pushed the creasote handkerchief under the dog’s nose, while the
creature stood with its fluffy legs separated, and with a most comical
cock to its head, like a connoisseur sniffing the _bouquet_ of a famous
vintage. Holmes then threw the handkerchief to a distance, fastened a
stout cord to the mongrel’s collar, and led him to the foot of the
water-barrel. The creature instantly broke into a succession of high,
tremulous yelps, and, with his nose on the ground, and his tail in the
air, pattered off upon the trail at a pace which strained his leash and
kept us at the top of our speed.

The east had been gradually whitening, and we could now see some
distance in the cold grey light. The square, massive house, with its
black, empty windows and high, bare walls, towered up, sad and forlorn,
behind us. Our course led right across the grounds, in and out among
the trenches and pits with which they were scarred and intersected. The
whole place, with its scattered dirt-heaps and ill-grown shrubs, had a
blighted, ill-omened look which harmonized with the black tragedy which
hung over it.

On reaching the boundary wall Toby ran along, whining eagerly,
underneath its shadow, and stopped finally in a corner screened by a
young beech. Where the two walls joined, several bricks had been
loosened, and the crevices left were worn down and rounded upon the
lower side, as though they had frequently been used as a ladder. Holmes
clambered up, and, taking the dog from me, he dropped it over upon the
other side.

“There’s the print of wooden-leg’s hand,” he remarked, as I mounted up
beside him. “You see the slight smudge of blood upon the white plaster.
What a lucky thing it is that we have had no very heavy rain since
yesterday! The scent will lie upon the road in spite of their
eight-and-twenty hours’ start.”

I confess that I had my doubts myself when I reflected upon the great
traffic which had passed along the London road in the interval. My
fears were soon appeased, however. Toby never hesitated or swerved, but
waddled on in his peculiar rolling fashion. Clearly, the pungent smell
of the creasote rose high above all other contending scents.

“Do not imagine,” said Holmes, “that I depend for my success in this
case upon the mere chance of one of these fellows having put his foot
in the chemical. I have knowledge now which would enable me to trace
them in many different ways. This, however, is the readiest and, since
fortune has put it into our hands, I should be culpable if I neglected
it. It has, however, prevented the case from becoming the pretty little
intellectual problem which it at one time promised to be. There might
have been some credit to be gained out of it, but for this too palpable
clue.”

“There is credit, and to spare,” said I. “I assure you, Holmes, that I
marvel at the means by which you obtain your results in this case, even
more than I did in the Jefferson Hope Murder. The thing seems to me to
be deeper and more inexplicable. How, for example, could you describe
with such confidence the wooden-legged man?”

“Pshaw, my dear boy! it was simplicity itself. I don’t wish to be
theatrical. It is all patent and above-board. Two officers who are in
command of a convict-guard learn an important secret as to buried
treasure. A map is drawn for them by an Englishman named Jonathan
Small. You remember that we saw the name upon the chart in Captain
Morstan’s possession. He had signed it in behalf of himself and his
associates,—the sign of the four, as he somewhat dramatically called
it. Aided by this chart, the officers—or one of them—gets the treasure
and brings it to England, leaving, we will suppose, some condition
under which he received it unfulfilled. Now, then, why did not Jonathan
Small get the treasure himself? The answer is obvious. The chart is
dated at a time when Morstan was brought into close association with
convicts. Jonathan Small did not get the treasure because he and his
associates were themselves convicts and could not get away.”

“But that is mere speculation,” said I.

“It is more than that. It is the only hypothesis which covers the
facts. Let us see how it fits in with the sequel. Major Sholto remains
at peace for some years, happy in the possession of his treasure. Then
he receives a letter from India which gives him a great fright. What
was that?”

“A letter to say that the men whom he had wronged had been set free.”

“Or had escaped. That is much more likely, for he would have known what
their term of imprisonment was. It would not have been a surprise to
him. What does he do then? He guards himself against a wooden-legged
man,—a white man, mark you, for he mistakes a white tradesman for him,
and actually fires a pistol at him. Now, only one white man’s name is
on the chart. The others are Hindoos or Mohammedans. There is no other
white man. Therefore we may say with confidence that the wooden-legged
man is identical with Jonathan Small. Does the reasoning strike you as
being faulty?”

“No: it is clear and concise.”

“Well, now, let us put ourselves in the place of Jonathan Small. Let us
look at it from his point of view. He comes to England with the double
idea of regaining what he would consider to be his rights and of having
his revenge upon the man who had wronged him. He found out where Sholto
lived, and very possibly he established communications with some one
inside the house. There is this butler, Lal Rao, whom we have not seen.
Mrs. Bernstone gives him far from a good character. Small could not
find out, however, where the treasure was hid, for no one ever knew,
save the major and one faithful servant who had died. Suddenly Small
learns that the major is on his death-bed. In a frenzy lest the secret
of the treasure die with him, he runs the gauntlet of the guards, makes
his way to the dying man’s window, and is only deterred from entering
by the presence of his two sons. Mad with hate, however, against the
dead man, he enters the room that night, searches his private papers in
the hope of discovering some memorandum relating to the treasure, and
finally leaves a momento of his visit in the short inscription upon the
card. He had doubtless planned beforehand that should he slay the major
he would leave some such record upon the body as a sign that it was not
a common murder, but, from the point of view of the four associates,
something in the nature of an act of justice. Whimsical and bizarre
conceits of this kind are common enough in the annals of crime, and
usually afford valuable indications as to the criminal. Do you follow
all this?”

“Very clearly.”

“Now, what could Jonathan Small do? He could only continue to keep a
secret watch upon the efforts made to find the treasure. Possibly he
leaves England and only comes back at intervals. Then comes the
discovery of the garret, and he is instantly informed of it. We again
trace the presence of some confederate in the household. Jonathan, with
his wooden leg, is utterly unable to reach the lofty room of
Bartholomew Sholto. He takes with him, however, a rather curious
associate, who gets over this difficulty, but dips his naked foot into
creasote, whence comes Toby, and a six-mile limp for a half-pay officer
with a damaged tendo Achillis.”

“But it was the associate, and not Jonathan, who committed the crime.”

“Quite so. And rather to Jonathan’s disgust, to judge by the way he
stamped about when he got into the room. He bore no grudge against
Bartholomew Sholto, and would have preferred if he could have been
simply bound and gagged. He did not wish to put his head in a halter.
There was no help for it, however: the savage instincts of his
companion had broken out, and the poison had done its work: so Jonathan
Small left his record, lowered the treasure-box to the ground, and
followed it himself. That was the train of events as far as I can
decipher them. Of course as to his personal appearance he must be
middle-aged, and must be sunburned after serving his time in such an
oven as the Andamans. His height is readily calculated from the length
of his stride, and we know that he was bearded. His hairiness was the
one point which impressed itself upon Thaddeus Sholto when he saw him
at the window. I don’t know that there is anything else.”

“The associate?”

“Ah, well, there is no great mystery in that. But you will know all
about it soon enough. How sweet the morning air is! See how that one
little cloud floats like a pink feather from some gigantic flamingo.
Now the red rim of the sun pushes itself over the London cloud-bank. It
shines on a good many folk, but on none, I dare bet, who are on a
stranger errand than you and I. How small we feel with our petty
ambitions and strivings in the presence of the great elemental forces
of nature! Are you well up in your Jean Paul?”

“Fairly so. I worked back to him through Carlyle.”

“That was like following the brook to the parent lake. He makes one
curious but profound remark. It is that the chief proof of man’s real
greatness lies in his perception of his own smallness. It argues, you
see, a power of comparison and of appreciation which is in itself a
proof of nobility. There is much food for thought in Richter. You have
not a pistol, have you?”

“I have my stick.”

“It is just possible that we may need something of the sort if we get
to their lair. Jonathan I shall leave to you, but if the other turns
nasty I shall shoot him dead.” He took out his revolver as he spoke,
and, having loaded two of the chambers, he put it back into the
right-hand pocket of his jacket.

We had during this time been following the guidance of Toby down the
half-rural villa-lined roads which lead to the metropolis. Now,
however, we were beginning to come among continuous streets, where
labourers and dockmen were already astir, and slatternly women were
taking down shutters and brushing door-steps. At the square-topped
corner public houses business was just beginning, and rough-looking men
were emerging, rubbing their sleeves across their beards after their
morning wet. Strange dogs sauntered up and stared wonderingly at us as
we passed, but our inimitable Toby looked neither to the right nor to
the left, but trotted onwards with his nose to the ground and an
occasional eager whine which spoke of a hot scent.

We had traversed Streatham, Brixton, Camberwell, and now found
ourselves in Kennington Lane, having borne away through the
side-streets to the east of the Oval. The men whom we pursued seemed to
have taken a curiously zigzag road, with the idea probably of escaping
observation. They had never kept to the main road if a parallel
side-street would serve their turn. At the foot of Kennington Lane they
had edged away to the left through Bond Street and Miles Street. Where
the latter street turns into Knight’s Place, Toby ceased to advance,
but began to run backwards and forwards with one ear cocked and the
other drooping, the very picture of canine indecision. Then he waddled
round in circles, looking up to us from time to time, as if to ask for
sympathy in his embarrassment.

“What the deuce is the matter with the dog?” growled Holmes. “They
surely would not take a cab, or go off in a balloon.”

“Perhaps they stood here for some time,” I suggested.

“Ah! it’s all right. He’s off again,” said my companion, in a tone of
relief.

He was indeed off, for after sniffing round again he suddenly made up
his mind, and darted away with an energy and determination such as he
had not yet shown. The scent appeared to be much hotter than before,
for he had not even to put his nose on the ground, but tugged at his
leash and tried to break into a run. I could see by the gleam in
Holmes’s eyes that he thought we were nearing the end of our journey.

Our course now ran down Nine Elms until we came to Broderick and
Nelson’s large timber-yard, just past the White Eagle tavern. Here the
dog, frantic with excitement, turned down through the side-gate into
the enclosure, where the sawyers were already at work. On the dog raced
through sawdust and shavings, down an alley, round a passage, between
two wood-piles, and finally, with a triumphant yelp, sprang upon a
large barrel which still stood upon the hand-trolley on which it had
been brought. With lolling tongue and blinking eyes, Toby stood upon
the cask, looking from one to the other of us for some sign of
appreciation. The staves of the barrel and the wheels of the trolley
were smeared with a dark liquid, and the whole air was heavy with the
smell of creasote.

Sherlock Holmes and I looked blankly at each other, and then burst
simultaneously into an uncontrollable fit of laughter.




Chapter VIII
The Baker Street Irregulars


“What now?” I asked. “Toby has lost his character for infallibility.”

“He acted according to his lights,” said Holmes, lifting him down from
the barrel and walking him out of the timber-yard. “If you consider how
much creasote is carted about London in one day, it is no great wonder
that our trail should have been crossed. It is much used now,
especially for the seasoning of wood. Poor Toby is not to blame.”

“We must get on the main scent again, I suppose.”

“Yes. And, fortunately, we have no distance to go. Evidently what
puzzled the dog at the corner of Knight’s Place was that there were two
different trails running in opposite directions. We took the wrong one.
It only remains to follow the other.”

There was no difficulty about this. On leading Toby to the place where
he had committed his fault, he cast about in a wide circle and finally
dashed off in a fresh direction.

“We must take care that he does not now bring us to the place where the
creasote-barrel came from,” I observed.

“I had thought of that. But you notice that he keeps on the pavement,
whereas the barrel passed down the roadway. No, we are on the true
scent now.”

It tended down towards the river-side, running through Belmont Place
and Prince’s Street. At the end of Broad Street it ran right down to
the water’s edge, where there was a small wooden wharf. Toby led us to
the very edge of this, and there stood whining, looking out on the dark
current beyond.

“We are out of luck,” said Holmes. “They have taken to a boat here.”
Several small punts and skiffs were lying about in the water and on the
edge of the wharf. We took Toby round to each in turn, but, though he
sniffed earnestly, he made no sign.

Close to the rude landing-stage was a small brick house, with a wooden
placard slung out through the second window. “Mordecai Smith” was
printed across it in large letters, and, underneath, “Boats to hire by
the hour or day.” A second inscription above the door informed us that
a steam launch was kept,—a statement which was confirmed by a great
pile of coke upon the jetty. Sherlock Holmes looked slowly round, and
his face assumed an ominous expression.

“This looks bad,” said he. “These fellows are sharper than I expected.
They seem to have covered their tracks. There has, I fear, been
preconcerted management here.”

He was approaching the door of the house, when it opened, and a little,
curly-headed lad of six came running out, followed by a stoutish,
red-faced woman with a large sponge in her hand.

“You come back and be washed, Jack,” she shouted. “Come back, you young
imp; for if your father comes home and finds you like that, he’ll let
us hear of it.”

“Dear little chap!” said Holmes, strategically. “What a rosy-cheeked
young rascal! Now, Jack, is there anything you would like?”

The youth pondered for a moment. “I’d like a shillin’,” said he.

“Nothing you would like better?”

“I’d like two shillin’ better,” the prodigy answered, after some
thought.

“Here you are, then! Catch!—A fine child, Mrs. Smith!”

“Lor’ bless you, sir, he is that, and forward. He gets a’most too much
for me to manage, ’specially when my man is away days at a time.”

“Away, is he?” said Holmes, in a disappointed voice. “I am sorry for
that, for I wanted to speak to Mr. Smith.”

“He’s been away since yesterday mornin’, sir, and, truth to tell, I am
beginnin’ to feel frightened about him. But if it was about a boat,
sir, maybe I could serve as well.”

“I wanted to hire his steam launch.”

“Why, bless you, sir, it is in the steam launch that he has gone.
That’s what puzzles me; for I know there ain’t more coals in her than
would take her to about Woolwich and back. If he’d been away in the
barge I’d ha’ thought nothin’; for many a time a job has taken him as
far as Gravesend, and then if there was much doin’ there he might ha’
stayed over. But what good is a steam launch without coals?”

“He might have bought some at a wharf down the river.”

“He might, sir, but it weren’t his way. Many a time I’ve heard him call
out at the prices they charge for a few odd bags. Besides, I don’t like
that wooden-legged man, wi’ his ugly face and outlandish talk. What did
he want always knockin’ about here for?”

“A wooden-legged man?” said Holmes, with bland surprise.

“Yes, sir, a brown, monkey-faced chap that’s called more’n once for my
old man. It was him that roused him up yesternight, and, what’s more,
my man knew he was comin’, for he had steam up in the launch. I tell
you straight, sir, I don’t feel easy in my mind about it.”

“But, my dear Mrs. Smith,” said Holmes, shrugging his shoulders, “You
are frightening yourself about nothing. How could you possibly tell
that it was the wooden-legged man who came in the night? I don’t quite
understand how you can be so sure.”

“His voice, sir. I knew his voice, which is kind o’ thick and foggy. He
tapped at the winder,—about three it would be. ‘Show a leg, matey,’
says he: ‘time to turn out guard.’ My old man woke up Jim,—that’s my
eldest,—and away they went, without so much as a word to me. I could
hear the wooden leg clackin’ on the stones.”

“And was this wooden-legged man alone?”

“Couldn’t say, I am sure, sir. I didn’t hear no one else.”

“I am sorry, Mrs. Smith, for I wanted a steam launch, and I have heard
good reports of the—Let me see, what is her name?”

“The _Aurora_, sir.”

“Ah! She’s not that old green launch with a yellow line, very broad in
the beam?”

“No, indeed. She’s as trim a little thing as any on the river. She’s
been fresh painted, black with two red streaks.”

“Thanks. I hope that you will hear soon from Mr. Smith. I am going down
the river; and if I should see anything of the _Aurora_ I shall let him
know that you are uneasy. A black funnel, you say?”

“No, sir. Black with a white band.”

“Ah, of course. It was the sides which were black. Good-morning, Mrs.
Smith.—There is a boatman here with a wherry, Watson. We shall take it
and cross the river.

“The main thing with people of that sort,” said Holmes, as we sat in
the sheets of the wherry, “is never to let them think that their
information can be of the slightest importance to you. If you do, they
will instantly shut up like an oyster. If you listen to them under
protest, as it were, you are very likely to get what you want.”

“Our course now seems pretty clear,” said I.

“What would you do, then?”

“I would engage a launch and go down the river on the track of the
_Aurora_.”

“My dear fellow, it would be a colossal task. She may have touched at
any wharf on either side of the stream between here and Greenwich.
Below the bridge there is a perfect labyrinth of landing-places for
miles. It would take you days and days to exhaust them, if you set
about it alone.”

“Employ the police, then.”

“No. I shall probably call Athelney Jones in at the last moment. He is
not a bad fellow, and I should not like to do anything which would
injure him professionally. But I have a fancy for working it out
myself, now that we have gone so far.”

“Could we advertise, then, asking for information from wharfingers?”

“Worse and worse! Our men would know that the chase was hot at their
heels, and they would be off out of the country. As it is, they are
likely enough to leave, but as long as they think they are perfectly
safe they will be in no hurry. Jones’s energy will be of use to us
there, for his view of the case is sure to push itself into the daily
press, and the runaways will think that every one is off on the wrong
scent.”

“What are we to do, then?” I asked, as we landed near Millbank
Penitentiary.

“Take this hansom, drive home, have some breakfast, and get an hour’s
sleep. It is quite on the cards that we may be afoot to-night again.
Stop at a telegraph-office, cabby! We will keep Toby, for he may be of
use to us yet.”

We pulled up at the Great Peter Street post-office, and Holmes
despatched his wire. “Whom do you think that is to?” he asked, as we
resumed our journey.

“I am sure I don’t know.”

“You remember the Baker Street division of the detective police force
whom I employed in the Jefferson Hope case?”

“Well,” said I, laughing.

“This is just the case where they might be invaluable. If they fail, I
have other resources; but I shall try them first. That wire was to my
dirty little lieutenant, Wiggins, and I expect that he and his gang
will be with us before we have finished our breakfast.”

It was between eight and nine o’clock now, and I was conscious of a
strong reaction after the successive excitements of the night. I was
limp and weary, befogged in mind and fatigued in body. I had not the
professional enthusiasm which carried my companion on, nor could I look
at the matter as a mere abstract intellectual problem. As far as the
death of Bartholomew Sholto went, I had heard little good of him, and
could feel no intense antipathy to his murderers. The treasure,
however, was a different matter. That, or part of it, belonged
rightfully to Miss Morstan. While there was a chance of recovering it I
was ready to devote my life to the one object. True, if I found it it
would probably put her forever beyond my reach. Yet it would be a petty
and selfish love which would be influenced by such a thought as that.
If Holmes could work to find the criminals, I had a tenfold stronger
reason to urge me on to find the treasure.

A bath at Baker Street and a complete change freshened me up
wonderfully. When I came down to our room I found the breakfast laid
and Holmes pouring out the coffee.

“Here it is,” said he, laughing, and pointing to an open newspaper.
“The energetic Jones and the ubiquitous reporter have fixed it up
between them. But you have had enough of the case. Better have your ham
and eggs first.”

I took the paper from him and read the short notice, which was headed
“Mysterious Business at Upper Norwood.”

“About twelve o’clock last night,” said the _Standard_, “Mr.
Bartholomew Sholto, of Pondicherry Lodge, Upper Norwood, was found dead
in his room under circumstances which point to foul play. As far as we
can learn, no actual traces of violence were found upon Mr. Sholto’s
person, but a valuable collection of Indian gems which the deceased
gentleman had inherited from his father has been carried off. The
discovery was first made by Mr. Sherlock Holmes and Dr. Watson, who had
called at the house with Mr. Thaddeus Sholto, brother of the deceased.
By a singular piece of good fortune, Mr. Athelney Jones, the well-known
member of the detective police force, happened to be at the Norwood
Police Station, and was on the ground within half an hour of the first
alarm. His trained and experienced faculties were at once directed
towards the detection of the criminals, with the gratifying result that
the brother, Thaddeus Sholto, has already been arrested, together with
the housekeeper, Mrs. Bernstone, an Indian butler named Lal Rao, and a
porter, or gatekeeper, named McMurdo. It is quite certain that the
thief or thieves were well acquainted with the house, for Mr. Jones’s
well-known technical knowledge and his powers of minute observation
have enabled him to prove conclusively that the miscreants could not
have entered by the door or by the window, but must have made their way
across the roof of the building, and so through a trap-door into a room
which communicated with that in which the body was found. This fact,
which has been very clearly made out, proves conclusively that it was
no mere haphazard burglary. The prompt and energetic action of the
officers of the law shows the great advantage of the presence on such
occasions of a single vigorous and masterful mind. We cannot but think
that it supplies an argument to those who would wish to see our
detectives more decentralised, and so brought into closer and more
effective touch with the cases which it is their duty to investigate.”

“Isn’t it gorgeous!” said Holmes, grinning over his coffee-cup. “What
do you think of it?”

“I think that we have had a close shave ourselves of being arrested for
the crime.”

“So do I. I wouldn’t answer for our safety now, if he should happen to
have another of his attacks of energy.”

At this moment there was a loud ring at the bell, and I could hear Mrs.
Hudson, our landlady, raising her voice in a wail of expostulation and
dismay.

“By heaven, Holmes,” I said, half rising, “I believe that they are
really after us.”

“No, it’s not quite so bad as that. It is the unofficial force,—the
Baker Street irregulars.”

As he spoke, there came a swift pattering of naked feet upon the
stairs, a clatter of high voices, and in rushed a dozen dirty and
ragged little street-Arabs. There was some show of discipline among
them, despite their tumultuous entry, for they instantly drew up in
line and stood facing us with expectant faces. One of their number,
taller and older than the others, stood forward with an air of lounging
superiority which was very funny in such a disreputable little
scarecrow.

“Got your message, sir,” said he, “and brought ’em on sharp. Three bob
and a tanner for tickets.”

“Here you are,” said Holmes, producing some silver. “In future they can
report to you, Wiggins, and you to me. I cannot have the house invaded
in this way. However, it is just as well that you should all hear the
instructions. I want to find the whereabouts of a steam launch called
the _Aurora_, owner Mordecai Smith, black with two red streaks, funnel
black with a white band. She is down the river somewhere. I want one
boy to be at Mordecai Smith’s landing-stage opposite Millbank to say if
the boat comes back. You must divide it out among yourselves, and do
both banks thoroughly. Let me know the moment you have news. Is that
all clear?”

“Yes, guv’nor,” said Wiggins.

“The old scale of pay, and a guinea to the boy who finds the boat.
Here’s a day in advance. Now off you go!” He handed them a shilling
each, and away they buzzed down the stairs, and I saw them a moment
later streaming down the street.

“If the launch is above water they will find her,” said Holmes, as he
rose from the table and lit his pipe. “They can go everywhere, see
everything, overhear every one. I expect to hear before evening that
they have spotted her. In the meanwhile, we can do nothing but await
results. We cannot pick up the broken trail until we find either the
_Aurora_ or Mr. Mordecai Smith.”

“Toby could eat these scraps, I dare say. Are you going to bed,
Holmes?”

“No; I am not tired. I have a curious constitution. I never remember
feeling tired by work, though idleness exhausts me completely. I am
going to smoke and to think over this queer business to which my fair
client has introduced us. If ever man had an easy task, this of ours
ought to be. Wooden-legged men are not so common, but the other man
must, I should think, be absolutely unique.”

“That other man again!”

“I have no wish to make a mystery of him,—to you, anyway. But you must
have formed your own opinion. Now, do consider the data. Diminutive
footmarks, toes never fettered by boots, naked feet, stone-headed
wooden mace, great agility, small poisoned darts. What do you make of
all this?”

“A savage!” I exclaimed. “Perhaps one of those Indians who were the
associates of Jonathan Small.”

“Hardly that,” said he. “When first I saw signs of strange weapons I
was inclined to think so; but the remarkable character of the footmarks
caused me to reconsider my views. Some of the inhabitants of the Indian
Peninsula are small men, but none could have left such marks as that.
The Hindoo proper has long and thin feet. The sandal-wearing Mohammedan
has the great toe well separated from the others, because the thong is
commonly passed between. These little darts, too, could only be shot in
one way. They are from a blow-pipe. Now, then, where are we to find our
savage?”

“South American,” I hazarded.

He stretched his hand up, and took down a bulky volume from the shelf.
“This is the first volume of a gazetteer which is now being published.
It may be looked upon as the very latest authority. What have we here?
‘Andaman Islands, situated 340 miles to the north of Sumatra, in the
Bay of Bengal.’ Hum! hum! What’s all this? Moist climate, coral reefs,
sharks, Port Blair, convict-barracks, Rutland Island, cottonwoods—Ah,
here we are. ‘The aborigines of the Andaman Islands may perhaps claim
the distinction of being the smallest race upon this earth, though some
anthropologists prefer the Bushmen of Africa, the Digger Indians of
America, and the Terra del Fuegians. The average height is rather below
four feet, although many full-grown adults may be found who are very
much smaller than this. They are a fierce, morose, and intractable
people, though capable of forming most devoted friendships when their
confidence has once been gained.’ Mark that, Watson. Now, then, listen
to this. ‘They are naturally hideous, having large, misshapen heads,
small, fierce eyes, and distorted features. Their feet and hands,
however, are remarkably small. So intractable and fierce are they that
all the efforts of the British official have failed to win them over in
any degree. They have always been a terror to shipwrecked crews,
braining the survivors with their stone-headed clubs, or shooting them
with their poisoned arrows. These massacres are invariably concluded by
a cannibal feast.’ Nice, amiable people, Watson! If this fellow had
been left to his own unaided devices this affair might have taken an
even more ghastly turn. I fancy that, even as it is, Jonathan Small
would give a good deal not to have employed him.”

“But how came he to have so singular a companion?”

“Ah, that is more than I can tell. Since, however, we had already
determined that Small had come from the Andamans, it is not so very
wonderful that this islander should be with him. No doubt we shall know
all about it in time. Look here, Watson; you look regularly done. Lie
down there on the sofa, and see if I can put you to sleep.”

He took up his violin from the corner, and as I stretched myself out he
began to play some low, dreamy, melodious air,—his own, no doubt, for
he had a remarkable gift for improvisation. I have a vague remembrance
of his gaunt limbs, his earnest face, and the rise and fall of his bow.
Then I seemed to be floated peacefully away upon a soft sea of sound,
until I found myself in dreamland, with the sweet face of Mary Morstan
looking down upon me.




Chapter IX
A Break in the Chain


It was late in the afternoon before I woke, strengthened and refreshed.
Sherlock Holmes still sat exactly as I had left him, save that he had
laid aside his violin and was deep in a book. He looked across at me,
as I stirred, and I noticed that his face was dark and troubled.

“You have slept soundly,” he said. “I feared that our talk would wake
you.”

“I heard nothing,” I answered. “Have you had fresh news, then?”

“Unfortunately, no. I confess that I am surprised and disappointed. I
expected something definite by this time. Wiggins has just been up to
report. He says that no trace can be found of the launch. It is a
provoking check, for every hour is of importance.”

“Can I do anything? I am perfectly fresh now, and quite ready for
another night’s outing.”

“No, we can do nothing. We can only wait. If we go ourselves, the
message might come in our absence, and delay be caused. You can do what
you will, but I must remain on guard.”

“Then I shall run over to Camberwell and call upon Mrs. Cecil
Forrester. She asked me to, yesterday.”

“On Mrs. Cecil Forrester?” asked Holmes, with the twinkle of a smile in
his eyes.

“Well, of course Miss Morstan too. They were anxious to hear what
happened.”

“I would not tell them too much,” said Holmes. “Women are never to be
entirely trusted,—not the best of them.”

I did not pause to argue over this atrocious sentiment. “I shall be
back in an hour or two,” I remarked.

“All right! Good luck! But, I say, if you are crossing the river you
may as well return Toby, for I don’t think it is at all likely that we
shall have any use for him now.”

I took our mongrel accordingly, and left him, together with a
half-sovereign, at the old naturalist’s in Pinchin Lane. At Camberwell
I found Miss Morstan a little weary after her night’s adventures, but
very eager to hear the news. Mrs. Forrester, too, was full of
curiosity. I told them all that we had done, suppressing, however, the
more dreadful parts of the tragedy. Thus, although I spoke of Mr.
Sholto’s death, I said nothing of the exact manner and method of it.
With all my omissions, however, there was enough to startle and amaze
them.

“It is a romance!” cried Mrs. Forrester. “An injured lady, half a
million in treasure, a black cannibal, and a wooden-legged ruffian.
They take the place of the conventional dragon or wicked earl.”

“And two knight-errants to the rescue,” added Miss Morstan, with a
bright glance at me.

“Why, Mary, your fortune depends upon the issue of this search. I don’t
think that you are nearly excited enough. Just imagine what it must be
to be so rich, and to have the world at your feet!”

It sent a little thrill of joy to my heart to notice that she showed no
sign of elation at the prospect. On the contrary, she gave a toss of
her proud head, as though the matter were one in which she took small
interest.

“It is for Mr. Thaddeus Sholto that I am anxious,” she said. “Nothing
else is of any consequence; but I think that he has behaved most kindly
and honourably throughout. It is our duty to clear him of this dreadful
and unfounded charge.”

It was evening before I left Camberwell, and quite dark by the time I
reached home. My companion’s book and pipe lay by his chair, but he had
disappeared. I looked about in the hope of seeing a note, but there was
none.

“I suppose that Mr. Sherlock Holmes has gone out,” I said to Mrs.
Hudson as she came up to lower the blinds.

“No, sir. He has gone to his room, sir. Do you know, sir,” sinking her
voice into an impressive whisper, “I am afraid for his health?”

“Why so, Mrs. Hudson?”

“Well, he’s that strange, sir. After you was gone he walked and he
walked, up and down, and up and down, until I was weary of the sound of
his footstep. Then I heard him talking to himself and muttering, and
every time the bell rang out he came on the stairhead, with ‘What is
that, Mrs. Hudson?’ And now he has slammed off to his room, but I can
hear him walking away the same as ever. I hope he’s not going to be
ill, sir. I ventured to say something to him about cooling medicine,
but he turned on me, sir, with such a look that I don’t know how ever I
got out of the room.”

“I don’t think that you have any cause to be uneasy, Mrs. Hudson,” I
answered. “I have seen him like this before. He has some small matter
upon his mind which makes him restless.” I tried to speak lightly to
our worthy landlady, but I was myself somewhat uneasy when through the
long night I still from time to time heard the dull sound of his tread,
and knew how his keen spirit was chafing against this involuntary
inaction.

At breakfast-time he looked worn and haggard, with a little fleck of
feverish colour upon either cheek.

“You are knocking yourself up, old man,” I remarked. “I heard you
marching about in the night.”

“No, I could not sleep,” he answered. “This infernal problem is
consuming me. It is too much to be balked by so petty an obstacle, when
all else had been overcome. I know the men, the launch, everything; and
yet I can get no news. I have set other agencies at work, and used
every means at my disposal. The whole river has been searched on either
side, but there is no news, nor has Mrs. Smith heard of her husband. I
shall come to the conclusion soon that they have scuttled the craft.
But there are objections to that.”

“Or that Mrs. Smith has put us on a wrong scent.”

“No, I think that may be dismissed. I had inquiries made, and there is
a launch of that description.”

“Could it have gone up the river?”

“I have considered that possibility too, and there is a search-party
who will work up as far as Richmond. If no news comes to-day, I shall
start off myself to-morrow, and go for the men rather than the boat.
But surely, surely, we shall hear something.”

We did not, however. Not a word came to us either from Wiggins or from
the other agencies. There were articles in most of the papers upon the
Norwood tragedy. They all appeared to be rather hostile to the
unfortunate Thaddeus Sholto. No fresh details were to be found,
however, in any of them, save that an inquest was to be held upon the
following day. I walked over to Camberwell in the evening to report our
ill success to the ladies, and on my return I found Holmes dejected and
somewhat morose. He would hardly reply to my questions, and busied
himself all evening in an abstruse chemical analysis which involved
much heating of retorts and distilling of vapours, ending at last in a
smell which fairly drove me out of the apartment. Up to the small hours
of the morning I could hear the clinking of his test-tubes which told
me that he was still engaged in his malodorous experiment.

In the early dawn I woke with a start, and was surprised to find him
standing by my bedside, clad in a rude sailor dress with a pea-jacket,
and a coarse red scarf round his neck.

“I am off down the river, Watson,” said he. “I have been turning it
over in my mind, and I can see only one way out of it. It is worth
trying, at all events.”

“Surely I can come with you, then?” said I.

“No; you can be much more useful if you will remain here as my
representative. I am loath to go, for it is quite on the cards that
some message may come during the day, though Wiggins was despondent
about it last night. I want you to open all notes and telegrams, and to
act on your own judgment if any news should come. Can I rely upon you?”

“Most certainly.”

“I am afraid that you will not be able to wire to me, for I can hardly
tell yet where I may find myself. If I am in luck, however, I may not
be gone so very long. I shall have news of some sort or other before I
get back.”

I had heard nothing of him by breakfast-time. On opening the
_Standard_, however, I found that there was a fresh allusion to the
business. “With reference to the Upper Norwood tragedy,” it remarked,
“we have reason to believe that the matter promises to be even more
complex and mysterious than was originally supposed. Fresh evidence has
shown that it is quite impossible that Mr. Thaddeus Sholto could have
been in any way concerned in the matter. He and the housekeeper, Mrs.
Bernstone, were both released yesterday evening. It is believed,
however, that the police have a clue as to the real culprits, and that
it is being prosecuted by Mr. Athelney Jones, of Scotland Yard, with
all his well-known energy and sagacity. Further arrests may be expected
at any moment.”

“That is satisfactory so far as it goes,” thought I. “Friend Sholto is
safe, at any rate. I wonder what the fresh clue may be; though it seems
to be a stereotyped form whenever the police have made a blunder.”

I tossed the paper down upon the table, but at that moment my eye
caught an advertisement in the agony column. It ran in this way:

“Lost.—Whereas Mordecai Smith, boatman, and his son, Jim, left Smith’s
Wharf at or about three o’clock last Tuesday morning in the steam
launch _Aurora_, black with two red stripes, funnel black with a white
band, the sum of five pounds will be paid to any one who can give
information to Mrs. Smith, at Smith’s Wharf, or at 221_b_ Baker Street,
as to the whereabouts of the said Mordecai Smith and the launch
_Aurora_.”


This was clearly Holmes’s doing. The Baker Street address was enough to
prove that. It struck me as rather ingenious, because it might be read
by the fugitives without their seeing in it more than the natural
anxiety of a wife for her missing husband.

It was a long day. Every time that a knock came to the door, or a sharp
step passed in the street, I imagined that it was either Holmes
returning or an answer to his advertisement. I tried to read, but my
thoughts would wander off to our strange quest and to the ill-assorted
and villainous pair whom we were pursuing. Could there be, I wondered,
some radical flaw in my companion’s reasoning. Might he be suffering
from some huge self-deception? Was it not possible that his nimble and
speculative mind had built up this wild theory upon faulty premises? I
had never known him to be wrong; and yet the keenest reasoner may
occasionally be deceived. He was likely, I thought, to fall into error
through the over-refinement of his logic,—his preference for a subtle
and bizarre explanation when a plainer and more commonplace one lay
ready to his hand. Yet, on the other hand, I had myself seen the
evidence, and I had heard the reasons for his deductions. When I looked
back on the long chain of curious circumstances, many of them trivial
in themselves, but all tending in the same direction, I could not
disguise from myself that even if Holmes’s explanation were incorrect
the true theory must be equally _outré_ and startling.

At three o’clock in the afternoon there was a loud peal at the bell, an
authoritative voice in the hall, and, to my surprise, no less a person
than Mr. Athelney Jones was shown up to me. Very different was he,
however, from the brusque and masterful professor of common sense who
had taken over the case so confidently at Upper Norwood. His expression
was downcast, and his bearing meek and even apologetic.

“Good-day, sir; good-day,” said he. “Mr. Sherlock Holmes is out, I
understand.”

“Yes, and I cannot be sure when he will be back. But perhaps you would
care to wait. Take that chair and try one of these cigars.”

“Thank you; I don’t mind if I do,” said he, mopping his face with a red
bandanna handkerchief.

“And a whiskey-and-soda?”

“Well, half a glass. It is very hot for the time of year; and I have
had a good deal to worry and try me. You know my theory about this
Norwood case?”

“I remember that you expressed one.”

“Well, I have been obliged to reconsider it. I had my net drawn tightly
round Mr. Sholto, sir, when pop he went through a hole in the middle of
it. He was able to prove an alibi which could not be shaken. From the
time that he left his brother’s room he was never out of sight of some
one or other. So it could not be he who climbed over roofs and through
trap-doors. It’s a very dark case, and my professional credit is at
stake. I should be very glad of a little assistance.”

“We all need help sometimes,” said I.

“Your friend Mr. Sherlock Holmes is a wonderful man, sir,” said he, in
a husky and confidential voice. “He’s a man who is not to be beat. I
have known that young man go into a good many cases, but I never saw
the case yet that he could not throw a light upon. He is irregular in
his methods, and a little quick perhaps in jumping at theories, but, on
the whole, I think he would have made a most promising officer, and I
don’t care who knows it. I have had a wire from him this morning, by
which I understand that he has got some clue to this Sholto business.
Here is the message.”

He took the telegram out of his pocket, and handed it to me. It was
dated from Poplar at twelve o’clock. “Go to Baker Street at once,” it
said. “If I have not returned, wait for me. I am close on the track of
the Sholto gang. You can come with us to-night if you want to be in at
the finish.”

“This sounds well. He has evidently picked up the scent again,” said I.

“Ah, then he has been at fault too,” exclaimed Jones, with evident
satisfaction. “Even the best of us are thrown off sometimes. Of course
this may prove to be a false alarm; but it is my duty as an officer of
the law to allow no chance to slip. But there is some one at the door.
Perhaps this is he.”

A heavy step was heard ascending the stair, with a great wheezing and
rattling as from a man who was sorely put to it for breath. Once or
twice he stopped, as though the climb were too much for him, but at
last he made his way to our door and entered. His appearance
corresponded to the sounds which we had heard. He was an aged man, clad
in seafaring garb, with an old pea-jacket buttoned up to his throat.
His back was bowed, his knees were shaky, and his breathing was
painfully asthmatic. As he leaned upon a thick oaken cudgel his
shoulders heaved in the effort to draw the air into his lungs. He had a
coloured scarf round his chin, and I could see little of his face save
a pair of keen dark eyes, overhung by bushy white brows, and long grey
side-whiskers. Altogether he gave me the impression of a respectable
master mariner who had fallen into years and poverty.

“What is it, my man?” I asked.

He looked about him in the slow methodical fashion of old age.

“Is Mr. Sherlock Holmes here?” said he.

“No; but I am acting for him. You can tell me any message you have for
him.”

“It was to him himself I was to tell it,” said he.

“But I tell you that I am acting for him. Was it about Mordecai Smith’s
boat?”

“Yes. I knows well where it is. An’ I knows where the men he is after
are. An’ I knows where the treasure is. I knows all about it.”

“Then tell me, and I shall let him know.”

“It was to him I was to tell it,” he repeated, with the petulant
obstinacy of a very old man.

“Well, you must wait for him.”

“No, no; I ain’t goin’ to lose a whole day to please no one. If Mr.
Holmes ain’t here, then Mr. Holmes must find it all out for himself. I
don’t care about the look of either of you, and I won’t tell a word.”

He shuffled towards the door, but Athelney Jones got in front of him.

“Wait a bit, my friend,” said he. “You have important information, and
you must not walk off. We shall keep you, whether you like or not,
until our friend returns.”

The old man made a little run towards the door, but, as Athelney Jones
put his broad back up against it, he recognised the uselessness of
resistance.

“Pretty sort o’ treatment this!” he cried, stamping his stick. “I come
here to see a gentleman, and you two, who I never saw in my life, seize
me and treat me in this fashion!”

“You will be none the worse,” I said. “We shall recompense you for the
loss of your time. Sit over here on the sofa, and you will not have
long to wait.”

He came across sullenly enough, and seated himself with his face
resting on his hands. Jones and I resumed our cigars and our talk.
Suddenly, however, Holmes’s voice broke in upon us.

“I think that you might offer me a cigar too,” he said.

We both started in our chairs. There was Holmes sitting close to us
with an air of quiet amusement.

“Holmes!” I exclaimed. “You here! But where is the old man?”

“Here is the old man,” said he, holding out a heap of white hair. “Here
he is,—wig, whiskers, eyebrows, and all. I thought my disguise was
pretty good, but I hardly expected that it would stand that test.”

“Ah, You rogue!” cried Jones, highly delighted. “You would have made an
actor, and a rare one. You had the proper workhouse cough, and those
weak legs of yours are worth ten pounds a week. I thought I knew the
glint of your eye, though. You didn’t get away from us so easily, You
see.”

“I have been working in that get-up all day,” said he, lighting his
cigar. “You see, a good many of the criminal classes begin to know
me,—especially since our friend here took to publishing some of my
cases: so I can only go on the war-path under some simple disguise like
this. You got my wire?”

“Yes; that was what brought me here.”

“How has your case prospered?”

“It has all come to nothing. I have had to release two of my prisoners,
and there is no evidence against the other two.”

“Never mind. We shall give you two others in the place of them. But you
must put yourself under my orders. You are welcome to all the official
credit, but you must act on the line that I point out. Is that agreed?”

“Entirely, if you will help me to the men.”

“Well, then, in the first place I shall want a fast police-boat—a steam
launch—to be at the Westminster Stairs at seven o’clock.”

“That is easily managed. There is always one about there; but I can
step across the road and telephone to make sure.”

“Then I shall want two stanch men, in case of resistance.”

“There will be two or three in the boat. What else?”

“When we secure the men we shall get the treasure. I think that it
would be a pleasure to my friend here to take the box round to the
young lady to whom half of it rightfully belongs. Let her be the first
to open it.—Eh, Watson?”

“It would be a great pleasure to me.”

“Rather an irregular proceeding,” said Jones, shaking his head.
“However, the whole thing is irregular, and I suppose we must wink at
it. The treasure must afterwards be handed over to the authorities
until after the official investigation.”

“Certainly. That is easily managed. One other point. I should much like
to have a few details about this matter from the lips of Jonathan Small
himself. You know I like to work the detail of my cases out. There is
no objection to my having an unofficial interview with him, either here
in my rooms or elsewhere, as long as he is efficiently guarded?”

“Well, you are master of the situation. I have had no proof yet of the
existence of this Jonathan Small. However, if you can catch him I don’t
see how I can refuse you an interview with him.”

“That is understood, then?”

“Perfectly. Is there anything else?”

“Only that I insist upon your dining with us. It will be ready in half
an hour. I have oysters and a brace of grouse, with something a little
choice in white wines.—Watson, you have never yet recognised my merits
as a housekeeper.”




Chapter X
The End of the Islander


Our meal was a merry one. Holmes could talk exceedingly well when he
chose, and that night he did choose. He appeared to be in a state of
nervous exaltation. I have never known him so brilliant. He spoke on a
quick succession of subjects,—on miracle-plays, on mediæval pottery, on
Stradivarius violins, on the Buddhism of Ceylon, and on the war-ships
of the future,—handling each as though he had made a special study of
it. His bright humour marked the reaction from his black depression of
the preceding days. Athelney Jones proved to be a sociable soul in his
hours of relaxation, and faced his dinner with the air of a _bon
vivant_. For myself, I felt elated at the thought that we were nearing
the end of our task, and I caught something of Holmes’s gaiety. None of
us alluded during dinner to the cause which had brought us together.

When the cloth was cleared, Holmes glanced at his watch, and filled up
three glasses with port. “One bumper,” said he, “to the success of our
little expedition. And now it is high time we were off. Have you a
pistol, Watson?”

“I have my old service-revolver in my desk.”

“You had best take it, then. It is well to be prepared. I see that the
cab is at the door. I ordered it for half-past six.”

It was a little past seven before we reached the Westminster wharf, and
found our launch awaiting us. Holmes eyed it critically.

“Is there anything to mark it as a police-boat?”

“Yes,—that green lamp at the side.”

“Then take it off.”

The small change was made, we stepped on board, and the ropes were cast
off. Jones, Holmes, and I sat in the stern. There was one man at the
rudder, one to tend the engines, and two burly police-inspectors
forward.

“Where to?” asked Jones.

“To the Tower. Tell them to stop opposite Jacobson’s Yard.”

Our craft was evidently a very fast one. We shot past the long lines of
loaded barges as though they were stationary. Holmes smiled with
satisfaction as we overhauled a river steamer and left her behind us.

“We ought to be able to catch anything on the river,” he said.

“Well, hardly that. But there are not many launches to beat us.”

“We shall have to catch the _Aurora_, and she has a name for being a
clipper. I will tell you how the land lies, Watson. You recollect how
annoyed I was at being balked by so small a thing?”

“Yes.”

“Well, I gave my mind a thorough rest by plunging into a chemical
analysis. One of our greatest statesmen has said that a change of work
is the best rest. So it is. When I had succeeded in dissolving the
hydrocarbon which I was at work at, I came back to our problem of the
Sholtos, and thought the whole matter out again. My boys had been up
the river and down the river without result. The launch was not at any
landing-stage or wharf, nor had it returned. Yet it could hardly have
been scuttled to hide their traces,—though that always remained as a
possible hypothesis if all else failed. I knew this man Small had a
certain degree of low cunning, but I did not think him capable of
anything in the nature of delicate finesse. That is usually a product
of higher education. I then reflected that since he had certainly been
in London some time—as we had evidence that he maintained a continual
watch over Pondicherry Lodge—he could hardly leave at a moment’s
notice, but would need some little time, if it were only a day, to
arrange his affairs. That was the balance of probability, at any rate.”

“It seems to me to be a little weak,” said I. “It is more probable that
he had arranged his affairs before ever he set out upon his
expedition.”

“No, I hardly think so. This lair of his would be too valuable a
retreat in case of need for him to give it up until he was sure that he
could do without it. But a second consideration struck me. Jonathan
Small must have felt that the peculiar appearance of his companion,
however much he may have top-coated him, would give rise to gossip, and
possibly be associated with this Norwood tragedy. He was quite sharp
enough to see that. They had started from their head-quarters under
cover of darkness, and he would wish to get back before it was broad
light. Now, it was past three o’clock, according to Mrs. Smith, when
they got the boat. It would be quite bright, and people would be about
in an hour or so. Therefore, I argued, they did not go very far. They
paid Smith well to hold his tongue, reserved his launch for the final
escape, and hurried to their lodgings with the treasure-box. In a
couple of nights, when they had time to see what view the papers took,
and whether there was any suspicion, they would make their way under
cover of darkness to some ship at Gravesend or in the Downs, where no
doubt they had already arranged for passages to America or the
Colonies.”

“But the launch? They could not have taken that to their lodgings.”

“Quite so. I argued that the launch must be no great way off, in spite
of its invisibility. I then put myself in the place of Small, and
looked at it as a man of his capacity would. He would probably consider
that to send back the launch or to keep it at a wharf would make
pursuit easy if the police did happen to get on his track. How, then,
could he conceal the launch and yet have her at hand when wanted? I
wondered what I should do myself if I were in his shoes. I could only
think of one way of doing it. I might hand the launch over to some
boat-builder or repairer, with directions to make a trifling change in
her. She would then be removed to his shed or yard, and so be
effectually concealed, while at the same time I could have her at a few
hours’ notice.”

“That seems simple enough.”

“It is just these very simple things which are extremely liable to be
overlooked. However, I determined to act on the idea. I started at once
in this harmless seaman’s rig and inquired at all the yards down the
river. I drew blank at fifteen, but at the sixteenth—Jacobson’s—I
learned that the _Aurora_ had been handed over to them two days ago by
a wooden-legged man, with some trivial directions as to her rudder.
‘There ain’t naught amiss with her rudder,’ said the foreman. ‘There
she lies, with the red streaks.’ At that moment who should come down
but Mordecai Smith, the missing owner? He was rather the worse for
liquor. I should not, of course, have known him, but he bellowed out
his name and the name of his launch. ‘I want her to-night at eight
o’clock,’ said he,—‘eight o’clock sharp, mind, for I have two gentlemen
who won’t be kept waiting.’ They had evidently paid him well, for he
was very flush of money, chucking shillings about to the men. I
followed him some distance, but he subsided into an ale-house: so I
went back to the yard, and, happening to pick up one of my boys on the
way, I stationed him as a sentry over the launch. He is to stand at
water’s edge and wave his handkerchief to us when they start. We shall
be lying off in the stream, and it will be a strange thing if we do not
take men, treasure, and all.”

“You have planned it all very neatly, whether they are the right men or
not,” said Jones; “but if the affair were in my hands I should have had
a body of police in Jacobson’s Yard, and arrested them when they came
down.”

“Which would have been never. This man Small is a pretty shrewd fellow.
He would send a scout on ahead, and if anything made him suspicious lie
snug for another week.”

“But you might have stuck to Mordecai Smith, and so been led to their
hiding-place,” said I.

“In that case I should have wasted my day. I think that it is a hundred
to one against Smith knowing where they live. As long as he has liquor
and good pay, why should he ask questions? They send him messages what
to do. No, I thought over every possible course, and this is the best.”

While this conversation had been proceeding, we had been shooting the
long series of bridges which span the Thames. As we passed the City the
last rays of the sun were gilding the cross upon the summit of St.
Paul’s. It was twilight before we reached the Tower.

“That is Jacobson’s Yard,” said Holmes, pointing to a bristle of masts
and rigging on the Surrey side. “Cruise gently up and down here under
cover of this string of lighters.” He took a pair of night-glasses from
his pocket and gazed some time at the shore. “I see my sentry at his
post,” he remarked, “but no sign of a handkerchief.”

“Suppose we go down-stream a short way and lie in wait for them,” said
Jones, eagerly. We were all eager by this time, even the policemen and
stokers, who had a very vague idea of what was going forward.

“We have no right to take anything for granted,” Holmes answered. “It
is certainly ten to one that they go down-stream, but we cannot be
certain. From this point we can see the entrance of the yard, and they
can hardly see us. It will be a clear night and plenty of light. We
must stay where we are. See how the folk swarm over yonder in the
gaslight.”

“They are coming from work in the yard.”

“Dirty-looking rascals, but I suppose every one has some little
immortal spark concealed about him. You would not think it, to look at
them. There is no _a priori_ probability about it. A strange enigma is
man!”

“Some one calls him a soul concealed in an animal,” I suggested.

“Winwood Reade is good upon the subject,” said Holmes. “He remarks
that, while the individual man is an insoluble puzzle, in the aggregate
he becomes a mathematical certainty. You can, for example, never
foretell what any one man will do, but you can say with precision what
an average number will be up to. Individuals vary, but percentages
remain constant. So says the statistician. But do I see a handkerchief?
Surely there is a white flutter over yonder.”

“Yes, it is your boy,” I cried. “I can see him plainly.”

“And there is the _Aurora_,” exclaimed Holmes, “and going like the
devil! Full speed ahead, engineer. Make after that launch with the
yellow light. By heaven, I shall never forgive myself if she proves to
have the heels of us!”

She had slipped unseen through the yard-entrance and passed behind two
or three small craft, so that she had fairly got her speed up before we
saw her. Now she was flying down the stream, near in to the shore,
going at a tremendous rate. Jones looked gravely at her and shook his
head.

“She is very fast,” he said. “I doubt if we shall catch her.”

“We _must_ catch her!” cried Holmes, between his teeth. “Heap it on,
stokers! Make her do all she can! If we burn the boat we must have
them!”

We were fairly after her now. The furnaces roared, and the powerful
engines whizzed and clanked, like a great metallic heart. Her sharp,
steep prow cut through the river-water and sent two rolling waves to
right and to left of us. With every throb of the engines we sprang and
quivered like a living thing. One great yellow lantern in our bows
threw a long, flickering funnel of light in front of us. Right ahead a
dark blur upon the water showed where the _Aurora_ lay, and the swirl
of white foam behind her spoke of the pace at which she was going. We
flashed past barges, steamers, merchant-vessels, in and out, behind
this one and round the other. Voices hailed us out of the darkness, but
still the _Aurora_ thundered on, and still we followed close upon her
track.

“Pile it on, men, pile it on!” cried Holmes, looking down into the
engine-room, while the fierce glow from below beat upon his eager,
aquiline face. “Get every pound of steam you can.”

“I think we gain a little,” said Jones, with his eyes on the _Aurora_.

“I am sure of it,” said I. “We shall be up with her in a very few
minutes.”

At that moment, however, as our evil fate would have it, a tug with
three barges in tow blundered in between us. It was only by putting our
helm hard down that we avoided a collision, and before we could round
them and recover our way the _Aurora_ had gained a good two hundred
yards. She was still, however, well in view, and the murky uncertain
twilight was setting into a clear starlit night. Our boilers were
strained to their utmost, and the frail shell vibrated and creaked with
the fierce energy which was driving us along. We had shot through the
Pool, past the West India Docks, down the long Deptford Reach, and up
again after rounding the Isle of Dogs. The dull blur in front of us
resolved itself now clearly enough into the dainty _Aurora_. Jones
turned our search-light upon her, so that we could plainly see the
figures upon her deck. One man sat by the stern, with something black
between his knees over which he stooped. Beside him lay a dark mass
which looked like a Newfoundland dog. The boy held the tiller, while
against the red glare of the furnace I could see old Smith, stripped to
the waist, and shovelling coals for dear life. They may have had some
doubt at first as to whether we were really pursuing them, but now as
we followed every winding and turning which they took there could no
longer be any question about it. At Greenwich we were about three
hundred paces behind them. At Blackwall we could not have been more
than two hundred and fifty. I have coursed many creatures in many
countries during my checkered career, but never did sport give me such
a wild thrill as this mad, flying man-hunt down the Thames. Steadily we
drew in upon them, yard by yard. In the silence of the night we could
hear the panting and clanking of their machinery. The man in the stern
still crouched upon the deck, and his arms were moving as though he
were busy, while every now and then he would look up and measure with a
glance the distance which still separated us. Nearer we came and
nearer. Jones yelled to them to stop. We were not more than four boat’s
lengths behind them, both boats flying at a tremendous pace. It was a
clear reach of the river, with Barking Level upon one side and the
melancholy Plumstead Marshes upon the other. At our hail the man in the
stern sprang up from the deck and shook his two clinched fists at us,
cursing the while in a high, cracked voice. He was a good-sized,
powerful man, and as he stood poising himself with legs astride I could
see that from the thigh downwards there was but a wooden stump upon the
right side. At the sound of his strident, angry cries there was
movement in the huddled bundle upon the deck. It straightened itself
into a little black man—the smallest I have ever seen—with a great,
misshapen head and a shock of tangled, dishevelled hair. Holmes had
already drawn his revolver, and I whipped out mine at the sight of this
savage, distorted creature. He was wrapped in some sort of dark ulster
or blanket, which left only his face exposed; but that face was enough
to give a man a sleepless night. Never have I seen features so deeply
marked with all bestiality and cruelty. His small eyes glowed and
burned with a sombre light, and his thick lips were writhed back from
his teeth, which grinned and chattered at us with a half animal fury.

“Fire if he raises his hand,” said Holmes, quietly. We were within a
boat’s-length by this time, and almost within touch of our quarry. I
can see the two of them now as they stood, the white man with his legs
far apart, shrieking out curses, and the unhallowed dwarf with his
hideous face, and his strong yellow teeth gnashing at us in the light
of our lantern.

It was well that we had so clear a view of him. Even as we looked he
plucked out from under his covering a short, round piece of wood, like
a school-ruler, and clapped it to his lips. Our pistols rang out
together. He whirled round, threw up his arms, and with a kind of
choking cough fell sideways into the stream. I caught one glimpse of
his venomous, menacing eyes amid the white swirl of the waters. At the
same moment the wooden-legged man threw himself upon the rudder and put
it hard down, so that his boat made straight in for the southern bank,
while we shot past her stern, only clearing her by a few feet. We were
round after her in an instant, but she was already nearly at the bank.
It was a wild and desolate place, where the moon glimmered upon a wide
expanse of marsh-land, with pools of stagnant water and beds of
decaying vegetation. The launch with a dull thud ran up upon the
mud-bank, with her bow in the air and her stern flush with the water.
The fugitive sprang out, but his stump instantly sank its whole length
into the sodden soil. In vain he struggled and writhed. Not one step
could he possibly take either forwards or backwards. He yelled in
impotent rage, and kicked frantically into the mud with his other foot,
but his struggles only bored his wooden pin the deeper into the sticky
bank. When we brought our launch alongside he was so firmly anchored
that it was only by throwing the end of a rope over his shoulders that
we were able to haul him out, and to drag him, like some evil fish,
over our side. The two Smiths, father and son, sat sullenly in their
launch, but came aboard meekly enough when commanded. The _Aurora_
herself we hauled off and made fast to our stern. A solid iron chest of
Indian workmanship stood upon the deck. This, there could be no
question, was the same that had contained the ill-omened treasure of
the Sholtos. There was no key, but it was of considerable weight, so we
transferred it carefully to our own little cabin. As we steamed slowly
up-stream again, we flashed our search-light in every direction, but
there was no sign of the Islander. Somewhere in the dark ooze at the
bottom of the Thames lie the bones of that strange visitor to our
shores.

“See here,” said Holmes, pointing to the wooden hatchway. “We were
hardly quick enough with our pistols.” There, sure enough, just behind
where we had been standing, stuck one of those murderous darts which we
knew so well. It must have whizzed between us at the instant that we
fired. Holmes smiled at it and shrugged his shoulders in his easy
fashion, but I confess that it turned me sick to think of the horrible
death which had passed so close to us that night.




Chapter XI
The Great Agra Treasure


Our captive sat in the cabin opposite to the iron box which he had done
so much and waited so long to gain. He was a sunburned, reckless-eyed
fellow, with a network of lines and wrinkles all over his mahogany
features, which told of a hard, open-air life. There was a singular
prominence about his bearded chin which marked a man who was not to be
easily turned from his purpose. His age may have been fifty or
thereabouts, for his black, curly hair was thickly shot with grey. His
face in repose was not an unpleasing one, though his heavy brows and
aggressive chin gave him, as I had lately seen, a terrible expression
when moved to anger. He sat now with his handcuffed hands upon his lap,
and his head sunk upon his breast, while he looked with his keen,
twinkling eyes at the box which had been the cause of his ill-doings.
It seemed to me that there was more sorrow than anger in his rigid and
contained countenance. Once he looked up at me with a gleam of
something like humour in his eyes.

“Well, Jonathan Small,” said Holmes, lighting a cigar, “I am sorry that
it has come to this.”

“And so am I, sir,” he answered, frankly. “I don’t believe that I can
swing over the job. I give you my word on the book that I never raised
hand against Mr. Sholto. It was that little hell-hound Tonga who shot
one of his cursed darts into him. I had no part in it, sir. I was as
grieved as if it had been my blood-relation. I welted the little devil
with the slack end of the rope for it, but it was done, and I could not
undo it again.”

“Have a cigar,” said Holmes; “and you had best take a pull out of my
flask, for you are very wet. How could you expect so small and weak a
man as this black fellow to overpower Mr. Sholto and hold him while you
were climbing the rope?”

“You seem to know as much about it as if you were there, sir. The truth
is that I hoped to find the room clear. I knew the habits of the house
pretty well, and it was the time when Mr. Sholto usually went down to
his supper. I shall make no secret of the business. The best defence
that I can make is just the simple truth. Now, if it had been the old
major I would have swung for him with a light heart. I would have
thought no more of knifing him than of smoking this cigar. But it’s
cursed hard that I should be lagged over this young Sholto, with whom I
had no quarrel whatever.”

“You are under the charge of Mr. Athelney Jones, of Scotland Yard. He
is going to bring you up to my rooms, and I shall ask you for a true
account of the matter. You must make a clean breast of it, for if you
do I hope that I may be of use to you. I think I can prove that the
poison acts so quickly that the man was dead before ever you reached
the room.”

“That he was, sir. I never got such a turn in my life as when I saw him
grinning at me with his head on his shoulder as I climbed through the
window. It fairly shook me, sir. I’d have half killed Tonga for it if
he had not scrambled off. That was how he came to leave his club, and
some of his darts too, as he tells me, which I dare say helped to put
you on our track; though how you kept on it is more than I can tell. I
don’t feel no malice against you for it. But it does seem a queer
thing,” he added, with a bitter smile, “that I who have a fair claim to
nigh upon half a million of money should spend the first half of my
life building a breakwater in the Andamans, and am like to spend the
other half digging drains at Dartmoor. It was an evil day for me when
first I clapped eyes upon the merchant Achmet and had to do with the
Agra treasure, which never brought anything but a curse yet upon the
man who owned it. To him it brought murder, to Major Sholto it brought
fear and guilt, to me it has meant slavery for life.”

At this moment Athelney Jones thrust his broad face and heavy shoulders
into the tiny cabin. “Quite a family party,” he remarked. “I think I
shall have a pull at that flask, Holmes. Well, I think we may all
congratulate each other. Pity we didn’t take the other alive; but there
was no choice. I say, Holmes, you must confess that you cut it rather
fine. It was all we could do to overhaul her.”

“All is well that ends well,” said Holmes. “But I certainly did not
know that the _Aurora_ was such a clipper.”

“Smith says she is one of the fastest launches on the river, and that
if he had had another man to help him with the engines we should never
have caught her. He swears he knew nothing of this Norwood business.”

“Neither he did,” cried our prisoner,—“not a word. I chose his launch
because I heard that she was a flier. We told him nothing, but we paid
him well, and he was to get something handsome if we reached our
vessel, the _Esmeralda_, at Gravesend, outward bound for the Brazils.”

“Well, if he has done no wrong we shall see that no wrong comes to him.
If we are pretty quick in catching our men, we are not so quick in
condemning them.” It was amusing to notice how the consequential Jones
was already beginning to give himself airs on the strength of the
capture. From the slight smile which played over Sherlock Holmes’s
face, I could see that the speech had not been lost upon him.

“We will be at Vauxhall Bridge presently,” said Jones, “and shall land
you, Dr. Watson, with the treasure-box. I need hardly tell you that I
am taking a very grave responsibility upon myself in doing this. It is
most irregular; but of course an agreement is an agreement. I must,
however, as a matter of duty, send an inspector with you, since you
have so valuable a charge. You will drive, no doubt?”

“Yes, I shall drive.”

“It is a pity there is no key, that we may make an inventory first. You
will have to break it open. Where is the key, my man?”

“At the bottom of the river,” said Small, shortly.

“Hum! There was no use your giving this unnecessary trouble. We have
had work enough already through you. However, doctor, I need not warn
you to be careful. Bring the box back with you to the Baker Street
rooms. You will find us there, on our way to the station.”

They landed me at Vauxhall, with my heavy iron box, and with a bluff,
genial inspector as my companion. A quarter of an hour’s drive brought
us to Mrs. Cecil Forrester’s. The servant seemed surprised at so late a
visitor. Mrs. Cecil Forrester was out for the evening, she explained,
and likely to be very late. Miss Morstan, however, was in the
drawing-room: so to the drawing-room I went, box in hand, leaving the
obliging inspector in the cab.

She was seated by the open window, dressed in some sort of white
diaphanous material, with a little touch of scarlet at the neck and
waist. The soft light of a shaded lamp fell upon her as she leaned back
in the basket chair, playing over her sweet, grave face, and tinting
with a dull, metallic sparkle the rich coils of her luxuriant hair. One
white arm and hand drooped over the side of the chair, and her whole
pose and figure spoke of an absorbing melancholy. At the sound of my
foot-fall she sprang to her feet, however, and a bright flush of
surprise and of pleasure coloured her pale cheeks.

“I heard a cab drive up,” she said. “I thought that Mrs. Forrester had
come back very early, but I never dreamed that it might be you. What
news have you brought me?”

“I have brought something better than news,” said I, putting down the
box upon the table and speaking jovially and boisterously, though my
heart was heavy within me. “I have brought you something which is worth
all the news in the world. I have brought you a fortune.”

She glanced at the iron box. “Is that the treasure, then?” she asked,
coolly enough.

“Yes, this is the great Agra treasure. Half of it is yours and half is
Thaddeus Sholto’s. You will have a couple of hundred thousand each.
Think of that! An annuity of ten thousand pounds. There will be few
richer young ladies in England. Is it not glorious?”

I think that I must have been rather overacting my delight, and that
she detected a hollow ring in my congratulations, for I saw her
eyebrows rise a little, and she glanced at me curiously.

“If I have it,” said she, “I owe it to you.”

“No, no,” I answered, “not to me, but to my friend Sherlock Holmes.
With all the will in the world, I could never have followed up a clue
which has taxed even his analytical genius. As it was, we very nearly
lost it at the last moment.”

“Pray sit down and tell me all about it, Dr. Watson,” said she.

I narrated briefly what had occurred since I had seen her
last,—Holmes’s new method of search, the discovery of the _Aurora_, the
appearance of Athelney Jones, our expedition in the evening, and the
wild chase down the Thames. She listened with parted lips and shining
eyes to my recital of our adventures. When I spoke of the dart which
had so narrowly missed us, she turned so white that I feared that she
was about to faint.

“It is nothing,” she said, as I hastened to pour her out some water. “I
am all right again. It was a shock to me to hear that I had placed my
friends in such horrible peril.”

“That is all over,” I answered. “It was nothing. I will tell you no
more gloomy details. Let us turn to something brighter. There is the
treasure. What could be brighter than that? I got leave to bring it
with me, thinking that it would interest you to be the first to see
it.”

“It would be of the greatest interest to me,” she said. There was no
eagerness in her voice, however. It had struck her, doubtless, that it
might seem ungracious upon her part to be indifferent to a prize which
had cost so much to win.

“What a pretty box!” she said, stooping over it. “This is Indian work,
I suppose?”

“Yes; it is Benares metal-work.”

“And so heavy!” she exclaimed, trying to raise it. “The box alone must
be of some value. Where is the key?”

“Small threw it into the Thames,” I answered. “I must borrow Mrs.
Forrester’s poker.” There was in the front a thick and broad hasp,
wrought in the image of a sitting Buddha. Under this I thrust the end
of the poker and twisted it outward as a lever. The hasp sprang open
with a loud snap. With trembling fingers I flung back the lid. We both
stood gazing in astonishment. The box was empty!

No wonder that it was heavy. The iron-work was two-thirds of an inch
thick all round. It was massive, well made, and solid, like a chest
constructed to carry things of great price, but not one shred or crumb
of metal or jewelry lay within it. It was absolutely and completely
empty.

“The treasure is lost,” said Miss Morstan, calmly.

As I listened to the words and realised what they meant, a great shadow
seemed to pass from my soul. I did not know how this Agra treasure had
weighed me down, until now that it was finally removed. It was selfish,
no doubt, disloyal, wrong, but I could realise nothing save that the
golden barrier was gone from between us. “Thank God!” I ejaculated from
my very heart.

She looked at me with a quick, questioning smile. “Why do you say
that?” she asked.

“Because you are within my reach again,” I said, taking her hand. She
did not withdraw it. “Because I love you, Mary, as truly as ever a man
loved a woman. Because this treasure, these riches, sealed my lips. Now
that they are gone I can tell you how I love you. That is why I said,
‘Thank God.’”

“Then I say, ‘Thank God,’ too,” she whispered, as I drew her to my
side. Whoever had lost a treasure, I knew that night that I had gained
one.




Chapter XII
The Strange Story of Jonathan Small


A very patient man was that inspector in the cab, for it was a weary
time before I rejoined him. His face clouded over when I showed him the
empty box.

“There goes the reward!” said he, gloomily. “Where there is no money
there is no pay. This night’s work would have been worth a tenner each
to Sam Brown and me if the treasure had been there.”

“Mr. Thaddeus Sholto is a rich man,” I said. “He will see that you are
rewarded, treasure or no.”

The inspector shook his head despondently, however. “It’s a bad job,”
he repeated; “and so Mr. Athelney Jones will think.”

His forecast proved to be correct, for the detective looked blank
enough when I got to Baker Street and showed him the empty box. They
had only just arrived, Holmes, the prisoner, and he, for they had
changed their plans so far as to report themselves at a station upon
the way. My companion lounged in his arm-chair with his usual listless
expression, while Small sat stolidly opposite to him with his wooden
leg cocked over his sound one. As I exhibited the empty box he leaned
back in his chair and laughed aloud.

“This is your doing, Small,” said Athelney Jones, angrily.

“Yes, I have put it away where you shall never lay hand upon it,” he
cried, exultantly. “It is my treasure; and if I can’t have the loot
I’ll take darned good care that no one else does. I tell you that no
living man has any right to it, unless it is three men who are in the
Andaman convict-barracks and myself. I know now that I cannot have the
use of it, and I know that they cannot. I have acted all through for
them as much as for myself. It’s been the sign of four with us always.
Well I know that they would have had me do just what I have done, and
throw the treasure into the Thames rather than let it go to kith or kin
of Sholto or of Morstan. It was not to make them rich that we did for
Achmet. You’ll find the treasure where the key is, and where little
Tonga is. When I saw that your launch must catch us, I put the loot
away in a safe place. There are no rupees for you this journey.”

“You are deceiving us, Small,” said Athelney Jones, sternly. “If you
had wished to throw the treasure into the Thames it would have been
easier for you to have thrown box and all.”

“Easier for me to throw, and easier for you to recover,” he answered,
with a shrewd, sidelong look. “The man that was clever enough to hunt
me down is clever enough to pick an iron box from the bottom of a
river. Now that they are scattered over five miles or so, it may be a
harder job. It went to my heart to do it, though. I was half mad when
you came up with us. However, there’s no good grieving over it. I’ve
had ups in my life, and I’ve had downs, but I’ve learned not to cry
over spilled milk.”

“This is a very serious matter, Small,” said the detective. “If you had
helped justice, instead of thwarting it in this way, you would have had
a better chance at your trial.”

“Justice!” snarled the ex-convict. “A pretty justice! Whose loot is
this, if it is not ours? Where is the justice that I should give it up
to those who have never earned it? Look how I have earned it! Twenty
long years in that fever-ridden swamp, all day at work under the
mangrove-tree, all night chained up in the filthy convict-huts, bitten
by mosquitoes, racked with ague, bullied by every cursed black-faced
policeman who loved to take it out of a white man. That was how I
earned the Agra treasure; and you talk to me of justice because I
cannot bear to feel that I have paid this price only that another may
enjoy it! I would rather swing a score of times, or have one of Tonga’s
darts in my hide, than live in a convict’s cell and feel that another
man is at his ease in a palace with the money that should be mine.”
Small had dropped his mask of stoicism, and all this came out in a wild
whirl of words, while his eyes blazed, and the handcuffs clanked
together with the impassioned movement of his hands. I could
understand, as I saw the fury and the passion of the man, that it was
no groundless or unnatural terror which had possessed Major Sholto when
he first learned that the injured convict was upon his track.

“You forget that we know nothing of all this,” said Holmes quietly. “We
have not heard your story, and we cannot tell how far justice may
originally have been on your side.”

“Well, sir, you have been very fair-spoken to me, though I can see that
I have you to thank that I have these bracelets upon my wrists. Still,
I bear no grudge for that. It is all fair and above-board. If you want
to hear my story I have no wish to hold it back. What I say to you is
God’s truth, every word of it. Thank you; you can put the glass beside
me here, and I’ll put my lips to it if I am dry.

“I am a Worcestershire man myself,—born near Pershore. I dare say you
would find a heap of Smalls living there now if you were to look. I
have often thought of taking a look round there, but the truth is that
I was never much of a credit to the family, and I doubt if they would
be so very glad to see me. They were all steady, chapel-going folk,
small farmers, well-known and respected over the country-side, while I
was always a bit of a rover. At last, however, when I was about
eighteen, I gave them no more trouble, for I got into a mess over a
girl, and could only get out of it again by taking the Queen’s shilling
and joining the 3rd Buffs, which was just starting for India.

“I wasn’t destined to do much soldiering, however. I had just got past
the goose-step, and learned to handle my musket, when I was fool enough
to go swimming in the Ganges. Luckily for me, my company sergeant, John
Holder, was in the water at the same time, and he was one of the finest
swimmers in the service. A crocodile took me, just as I was half-way
across, and nipped off my right leg as clean as a surgeon could have
done it, just above the knee. What with the shock and the loss of
blood, I fainted, and should have drowned if Holder had not caught hold
of me and paddled for the bank. I was five months in hospital over it,
and when at last I was able to limp out of it with this timber toe
strapped to my stump I found myself invalided out of the army and
unfitted for any active occupation.

“I was, as you can imagine, pretty down on my luck at this time, for I
was a useless cripple though not yet in my twentieth year. However, my
misfortune soon proved to be a blessing in disguise. A man named Abel
White, who had come out there as an indigo-planter, wanted an overseer
to look after his coolies and keep them up to their work. He happened
to be a friend of our colonel’s, who had taken an interest in me since
the accident. To make a long story short, the colonel recommended me
strongly for the post and, as the work was mostly to be done on
horseback, my leg was no great obstacle, for I had enough knee left to
keep good grip on the saddle. What I had to do was to ride over the
plantation, to keep an eye on the men as they worked, and to report the
idlers. The pay was fair, I had comfortable quarters, and altogether I
was content to spend the remainder of my life in indigo-planting. Mr.
Abel White was a kind man, and he would often drop into my little
shanty and smoke a pipe with me, for white folk out there feel their
hearts warm to each other as they never do here at home.

“Well, I was never in luck’s way long. Suddenly, without a note of
warning, the great mutiny broke upon us. One month India lay as still
and peaceful, to all appearance, as Surrey or Kent; the next there were
two hundred thousand black devils let loose, and the country was a
perfect hell. Of course you know all about it, gentlemen,—a deal more
than I do, very like, since reading is not in my line. I only know what
I saw with my own eyes. Our plantation was at a place called Muttra,
near the border of the Northwest Provinces. Night after night the whole
sky was alight with the burning bungalows, and day after day we had
small companies of Europeans passing through our estate with their
wives and children, on their way to Agra, where were the nearest
troops. Mr. Abel White was an obstinate man. He had it in his head that
the affair had been exaggerated, and that it would blow over as
suddenly as it had sprung up. There he sat on his veranda, drinking
whiskey-pegs and smoking cheroots, while the country was in a blaze
about him. Of course we stuck by him, I and Dawson, who, with his wife,
used to do the book-work and the managing. Well, one fine day the crash
came. I had been away on a distant plantation, and was riding slowly
home in the evening, when my eye fell upon something all huddled
together at the bottom of a steep nullah. I rode down to see what it
was, and the cold struck through my heart when I found it was Dawson’s
wife, all cut into ribbons, and half eaten by jackals and native dogs.
A little further up the road Dawson himself was lying on his face,
quite dead, with an empty revolver in his hand and four Sepoys lying
across each other in front of him. I reined up my horse, wondering
which way I should turn, but at that moment I saw thick smoke curling
up from Abel White’s bungalow and the flames beginning to burst through
the roof. I knew then that I could do my employer no good, but would
only throw my own life away if I meddled in the matter. From where I
stood I could see hundreds of the black fiends, with their red coats
still on their backs, dancing and howling round the burning house. Some
of them pointed at me, and a couple of bullets sang past my head; so I
broke away across the paddy-fields, and found myself late at night safe
within the walls at Agra.

“As it proved, however, there was no great safety there, either. The
whole country was up like a swarm of bees. Wherever the English could
collect in little bands they held just the ground that their guns
commanded. Everywhere else they were helpless fugitives. It was a fight
of the millions against the hundreds; and the cruellest part of it was
that these men that we fought against, foot, horse, and gunners, were
our own picked troops, whom we had taught and trained, handling our own
weapons, and blowing our own bugle-calls. At Agra there were the 3rd
Bengal Fusiliers, some Sikhs, two troops of horse, and a battery of
artillery. A volunteer corps of clerks and merchants had been formed,
and this I joined, wooden leg and all. We went out to meet the rebels
at Shahgunge early in July, and we beat them back for a time, but our
powder gave out, and we had to fall back upon the city.

“Nothing but the worst news came to us from every side,—which is not to
be wondered at, for if you look at the map you will see that we were
right in the heart of it. Lucknow is rather better than a hundred miles
to the east, and Cawnpore about as far to the south. From every point
on the compass there was nothing but torture and murder and outrage.

“The city of Agra is a great place, swarming with fanatics and fierce
devil-worshippers of all sorts. Our handful of men were lost among the
narrow, winding streets. Our leader moved across the river, therefore,
and took up his position in the old fort at Agra. I don’t know if any
of you gentlemen have ever read or heard anything of that old fort. It
is a very queer place,—the queerest that ever I was in, and I have been
in some rum corners, too. First of all, it is enormous in size. I
should think that the enclosure must be acres and acres. There is a
modern part, which took all our garrison, women, children, stores, and
everything else, with plenty of room over. But the modern part is
nothing like the size of the old quarter, where nobody goes, and which
is given over to the scorpions and the centipedes. It is all full of
great deserted halls, and winding passages, and long corridors twisting
in and out, so that it is easy enough for folk to get lost in it. For
this reason it was seldom that any one went into it, though now and
again a party with torches might go exploring.

“The river washes along the front of the old fort, and so protects it,
but on the sides and behind there are many doors, and these had to be
guarded, of course, in the old quarter as well as in that which was
actually held by our troops. We were short-handed, with hardly men
enough to man the angles of the building and to serve the guns. It was
impossible for us, therefore, to station a strong guard at every one of
the innumerable gates. What we did was to organise a central
guard-house in the middle of the fort, and to leave each gate under the
charge of one white man and two or three natives. I was selected to
take charge during certain hours of the night of a small isolated door
upon the southwest side of the building. Two Sikh troopers were placed
under my command, and I was instructed if anything went wrong to fire
my musket, when I might rely upon help coming at once from the central
guard. As the guard was a good two hundred paces away, however, and as
the space between was cut up into a labyrinth of passages and
corridors, I had great doubts as to whether they could arrive in time
to be of any use in case of an actual attack.

“Well, I was pretty proud at having this small command given me, since
I was a raw recruit, and a game-legged one at that. For two nights I
kept the watch with my Punjaubees. They were tall, fierce-looking
chaps, Mahomet Singh and Abdullah Khan by name, both old fighting-men
who had borne arms against us at Chilian-wallah. They could talk
English pretty well, but I could get little out of them. They preferred
to stand together and jabber all night in their queer Sikh lingo. For
myself, I used to stand outside the gateway, looking down on the broad,
winding river and on the twinkling lights of the great city. The
beating of drums, the rattle of tomtoms, and the yells and howls of the
rebels, drunk with opium and with bang, were enough to remind us all
night of our dangerous neighbours across the stream. Every two hours
the officer of the night used to come round to all the posts, to make
sure that all was well.

“The third night of my watch was dark and dirty, with a small, driving
rain. It was dreary work standing in the gateway hour after hour in
such weather. I tried again and again to make my Sikhs talk, but
without much success. At two in the morning the rounds passed, and
broke for a moment the weariness of the night. Finding that my
companions would not be led into conversation, I took out my pipe, and
laid down my musket to strike the match. In an instant the two Sikhs
were upon me. One of them snatched my firelock up and levelled it at my
head, while the other held a great knife to my throat and swore between
his teeth that he would plunge it into me if I moved a step.

“My first thought was that these fellows were in league with the
rebels, and that this was the beginning of an assault. If our door were
in the hands of the Sepoys the place must fall, and the women and
children be treated as they were in Cawnpore. Maybe you gentlemen think
that I am just making out a case for myself, but I give you my word
that when I thought of that, though I felt the point of the knife at my
throat, I opened my mouth with the intention of giving a scream, if it
was my last one, which might alarm the main guard. The man who held me
seemed to know my thoughts; for, even as I braced myself to it, he
whispered, ‘Don’t make a noise. The fort is safe enough. There are no
rebel dogs on this side of the river.’ There was the ring of truth in
what he said, and I knew that if I raised my voice I was a dead man. I
could read it in the fellow’s brown eyes. I waited, therefore, in
silence, to see what it was that they wanted from me.

“‘Listen to me, Sahib,’ said the taller and fiercer of the pair, the
one whom they called Abdullah Khan. ‘You must either be with us now or
you must be silenced forever. The thing is too great a one for us to
hesitate. Either you are heart and soul with us on your oath on the
cross of the Christians, or your body this night shall be thrown into
the ditch and we shall pass over to our brothers in the rebel army.
There is no middle way. Which is it to be, death or life? We can only
give you three minutes to decide, for the time is passing, and all must
be done before the rounds come again.’

“‘How can I decide?’ said I. ‘You have not told me what you want of me.
But I tell you now that if it is anything against the safety of the
fort I will have no truck with it, so you can drive home your knife and
welcome.’

“‘It is nothing against the fort,’ said he. ‘We only ask you to do that
which your countrymen come to this land for. We ask you to be rich. If
you will be one of us this night, we will swear to you upon the naked
knife, and by the threefold oath which no Sikh was ever known to break,
that you shall have your fair share of the loot. A quarter of the
treasure shall be yours. We can say no fairer.’

“‘But what is the treasure, then?’ I asked. ‘I am as ready to be rich
as you can be, if you will but show me how it can be done.’

“‘You will swear, then,’ said he, ‘by the bones of your father, by the
honour of your mother, by the cross of your faith, to raise no hand and
speak no word against us, either now or afterwards?’

“‘I will swear it,’ I answered, ‘provided that the fort is not
endangered.’

“‘Then my comrade and I will swear that you shall have a quarter of the
treasure which shall be equally divided among the four of us.’

“‘There are but three,’ said I.

“‘No; Dost Akbar must have his share. We can tell the tale to you while
we await them. Do you stand at the gate, Mahomet Singh, and give notice
of their coming. The thing stands thus, Sahib, and I tell it to you
because I know that an oath is binding upon a Feringhee, and that we
may trust you. Had you been a lying Hindoo, though you had sworn by all
the gods in their false temples, your blood would have been upon the
knife, and your body in the water. But the Sikh knows the Englishman,
and the Englishman knows the Sikh. Hearken, then, to what I have to
say.

“‘There is a rajah in the northern provinces who has much wealth,
though his lands are small. Much has come to him from his father, and
more still he has set by himself, for he is of a low nature and hoards
his gold rather than spend it. When the troubles broke out he would be
friends both with the lion and the tiger,—with the Sepoy and with the
Company’s Raj. Soon, however, it seemed to him that the white men’s day
was come, for through all the land he could hear of nothing but of
their death and their overthrow. Yet, being a careful man, he made such
plans that, come what might, half at least of his treasure should be
left to him. That which was in gold and silver he kept by him in the
vaults of his palace, but the most precious stones and the choicest
pearls that he had he put in an iron box, and sent it by a trusty
servant who, under the guise of a merchant, should take it to the fort
at Agra, there to lie until the land is at peace. Thus, if the rebels
won he would have his money, but if the Company conquered his jewels
would be saved to him. Having thus divided his hoard, he threw himself
into the cause of the Sepoys, since they were strong upon his borders.
By doing this, mark you, Sahib, his property becomes the due of those
who have been true to their salt.

“‘This pretended merchant, who travels under the name of Achmet, is now
in the city of Agra, and desires to gain his way into the fort. He has
with him as travelling-companion my foster-brother Dost Akbar, who
knows his secret. Dost Akbar has promised this night to lead him to a
side-postern of the fort, and has chosen this one for his purpose. Here
he will come presently, and here he will find Mahomet Singh and myself
awaiting him. The place is lonely, and none shall know of his coming.
The world shall know of the merchant Achmet no more, but the great
treasure of the rajah shall be divided among us. What say you to it,
Sahib?’

“In Worcestershire the life of a man seems a great and a sacred thing;
but it is very different when there is fire and blood all round you and
you have been used to meeting death at every turn. Whether Achmet the
merchant lived or died was a thing as light as air to me, but at the
talk about the treasure my heart turned to it, and I thought of what I
might do in the old country with it, and how my folk would stare when
they saw their ne’er-do-well coming back with his pockets full of gold
moidores. I had, therefore, already made up my mind. Abdullah Khan,
however, thinking that I hesitated, pressed the matter more closely.

“‘Consider, Sahib,’ said he, ‘that if this man is taken by the
commandant he will be hung or shot, and his jewels taken by the
government, so that no man will be a rupee the better for them. Now,
since we do the taking of him, why should we not do the rest as well?
The jewels will be as well with us as in the Company’s coffers. There
will be enough to make every one of us rich men and great chiefs. No
one can know about the matter, for here we are cut off from all men.
What could be better for the purpose? Say again, then, Sahib, whether
you are with us, or if we must look upon you as an enemy.’

“‘I am with you heart and soul,’ said I.

“‘It is well,’ he answered, handing me back my firelock. ‘You see that
we trust you, for your word, like ours, is not to be broken. We have
now only to wait for my brother and the merchant.’

“‘Does your brother know, then, of what you will do?’ I asked.

“‘The plan is his. He has devised it. We will go to the gate and share
the watch with Mahomet Singh.’

“The rain was still falling steadily, for it was just the beginning of
the wet season. Brown, heavy clouds were drifting across the sky, and
it was hard to see more than a stone-cast. A deep moat lay in front of
our door, but the water was in places nearly dried up, and it could
easily be crossed. It was strange to me to be standing there with those
two wild Punjaubees waiting for the man who was coming to his death.

“Suddenly my eye caught the glint of a shaded lantern at the other side
of the moat. It vanished among the mound-heaps, and then appeared again
coming slowly in our direction.

“‘Here they are!’ I exclaimed.

“‘You will challenge him, Sahib, as usual,’ whispered Abdullah. ‘Give
him no cause for fear. Send us in with him, and we shall do the rest
while you stay here on guard. Have the lantern ready to uncover, that
we may be sure that it is indeed the man.’

“The light had flickered onwards, now stopping and now advancing, until
I could see two dark figures upon the other side of the moat. I let
them scramble down the sloping bank, splash through the mire, and climb
half-way up to the gate, before I challenged them.

“‘Who goes there?’ said I, in a subdued voice.

“‘Friends,’ came the answer. I uncovered my lantern and threw a flood
of light upon them. The first was an enormous Sikh, with a black beard
which swept nearly down to his cummerbund. Outside of a show I have
never seen so tall a man. The other was a little, fat, round fellow,
with a great yellow turban, and a bundle in his hand, done up in a
shawl. He seemed to be all in a quiver with fear, for his hands
twitched as if he had the ague, and his head kept turning to left and
right with two bright little twinkling eyes, like a mouse when he
ventures out from his hole. It gave me the chills to think of killing
him, but I thought of the treasure, and my heart set as hard as a flint
within me. When he saw my white face he gave a little chirrup of joy
and came running up towards me.

“‘Your protection, Sahib,’ he panted,—‘your protection for the unhappy
merchant Achmet. I have travelled across Rajpootana that I might seek
the shelter of the fort at Agra. I have been robbed and beaten and
abused because I have been the friend of the Company. It is a blessed
night this when I am once more in safety,—I and my poor possessions.’

“‘What have you in the bundle?’ I asked.

“‘An iron box,’ he answered, ‘which contains one or two little family
matters which are of no value to others, but which I should be sorry to
lose. Yet I am not a beggar; and I shall reward you, young Sahib, and
your governor also, if he will give me the shelter I ask.’

“I could not trust myself to speak longer with the man. The more I
looked at his fat, frightened face, the harder did it seem that we
should slay him in cold blood. It was best to get it over.

“‘Take him to the main guard,’ said I. The two Sikhs closed in upon him
on each side, and the giant walked behind, while they marched in
through the dark gateway. Never was a man so compassed round with
death. I remained at the gateway with the lantern.

“I could hear the measured tramp of their footsteps sounding through
the lonely corridors. Suddenly it ceased, and I heard voices, and a
scuffle, with the sound of blows. A moment later there came, to my
horror, a rush of footsteps coming in my direction, with the loud
breathing of a running man. I turned my lantern down the long, straight
passage, and there was the fat man, running like the wind, with a smear
of blood across his face, and close at his heels, bounding like a
tiger, the great black-bearded Sikh, with a knife flashing in his hand.
I have never seen a man run so fast as that little merchant. He was
gaining on the Sikh, and I could see that if he once passed me and got
to the open air he would save himself yet. My heart softened to him,
but again the thought of his treasure turned me hard and bitter. I cast
my firelock between his legs as he raced past, and he rolled twice over
like a shot rabbit. Ere he could stagger to his feet the Sikh was upon
him, and buried his knife twice in his side. The man never uttered moan
nor moved muscle, but lay were he had fallen. I think myself that he
may have broken his neck with the fall. You see, gentlemen, that I am
keeping my promise. I am telling you every work of the business just
exactly as it happened, whether it is in my favour or not.”

He stopped, and held out his manacled hands for the whiskey-and-water
which Holmes had brewed for him. For myself, I confess that I had now
conceived the utmost horror of the man, not only for this cold-blooded
business in which he had been concerned, but even more for the somewhat
flippant and careless way in which he narrated it. Whatever punishment
was in store for him, I felt that he might expect no sympathy from me.
Sherlock Holmes and Jones sat with their hands upon their knees, deeply
interested in the story, but with the same disgust written upon their
faces. He may have observed it, for there was a touch of defiance in
his voice and manner as he proceeded.

“It was all very bad, no doubt,” said he. “I should like to know how
many fellows in my shoes would have refused a share of this loot when
they knew that they would have their throats cut for their pains.
Besides, it was my life or his when once he was in the fort. If he had
got out, the whole business would come to light, and I should have been
court-martialled and shot as likely as not; for people were not very
lenient at a time like that.”

“Go on with your story,” said Holmes, shortly.

“Well, we carried him in, Abdullah, Akbar, and I. A fine weight he was,
too, for all that he was so short. Mahomet Singh was left to guard the
door. We took him to a place which the Sikhs had already prepared. It
was some distance off, where a winding passage leads to a great empty
hall, the brick walls of which were all crumbling to pieces. The earth
floor had sunk in at one place, making a natural grave, so we left
Achmet the merchant there, having first covered him over with loose
bricks. This done, we all went back to the treasure.

“It lay where he had dropped it when he was first attacked. The box was
the same which now lies open upon your table. A key was hung by a
silken cord to that carved handle upon the top. We opened it, and the
light of the lantern gleamed upon a collection of gems such as I have
read of and thought about when I was a little lad at Pershore. It was
blinding to look upon them. When we had feasted our eyes we took them
all out and made a list of them. There were one hundred and forty-three
diamonds of the first water, including one which has been called, I
believe, ‘the Great Mogul’ and is said to be the second largest stone
in existence. Then there were ninety-seven very fine emeralds, and one
hundred and seventy rubies, some of which, however, were small. There
were forty carbuncles, two hundred and ten sapphires, sixty-one agates,
and a great quantity of beryls, onyxes, cats’-eyes, turquoises, and
other stones, the very names of which I did not know at the time,
though I have become more familiar with them since. Besides this, there
were nearly three hundred very fine pearls, twelve of which were set in
a gold coronet. By the way, these last had been taken out of the chest
and were not there when I recovered it.

“After we had counted our treasures we put them back into the chest and
carried them to the gateway to show them to Mahomet Singh. Then we
solemnly renewed our oath to stand by each other and be true to our
secret. We agreed to conceal our loot in a safe place until the country
should be at peace again, and then to divide it equally among
ourselves. There was no use dividing it at present, for if gems of such
value were found upon us it would cause suspicion, and there was no
privacy in the fort nor any place where we could keep them. We carried
the box, therefore, into the same hall where we had buried the body,
and there, under certain bricks in the best-preserved wall, we made a
hollow and put our treasure. We made careful note of the place, and
next day I drew four plans, one for each of us, and put the sign of the
four of us at the bottom, for we had sworn that we should each always
act for all, so that none might take advantage. That is an oath that I
can put my hand to my heart and swear that I have never broken.

“Well, there’s no use my telling you gentlemen what came of the Indian
mutiny. After Wilson took Delhi and Sir Colin relieved Lucknow the back
of the business was broken. Fresh troops came pouring in, and Nana
Sahib made himself scarce over the frontier. A flying column under
Colonel Greathed came round to Agra and cleared the Pandies away from
it. Peace seemed to be settling upon the country, and we four were
beginning to hope that the time was at hand when we might safely go off
with our shares of the plunder. In a moment, however, our hopes were
shattered by our being arrested as the murderers of Achmet.

“It came about in this way. When the rajah put his jewels into the
hands of Achmet he did it because he knew that he was a trusty man.
They are suspicious folk in the East, however: so what does this rajah
do but take a second even more trusty servant and set him to play the
spy upon the first? This second man was ordered never to let Achmet out
of his sight, and he followed him like his shadow. He went after him
that night and saw him pass through the doorway. Of course he thought
he had taken refuge in the fort, and applied for admission there
himself next day, but could find no trace of Achmet. This seemed to him
so strange that he spoke about it to a sergeant of guides, who brought
it to the ears of the commandant. A thorough search was quickly made,
and the body was discovered. Thus at the very moment that we thought
that all was safe we were all four seized and brought to trial on a
charge of murder,—three of us because we had held the gate that night,
and the fourth because he was known to have been in the company of the
murdered man. Not a word about the jewels came out at the trial, for
the rajah had been deposed and driven out of India: so no one had any
particular interest in them. The murder, however, was clearly made out,
and it was certain that we must all have been concerned in it. The
three Sikhs got penal servitude for life, and I was condemned to death,
though my sentence was afterwards commuted into the same as the others.

“It was rather a queer position that we found ourselves in then. There
we were all four tied by the leg and with precious little chance of
ever getting out again, while we each held a secret which might have
put each of us in a palace if we could only have made use of it. It was
enough to make a man eat his heart out to have to stand the kick and
the cuff of every petty jack-in-office, to have rice to eat and water
to drink, when that gorgeous fortune was ready for him outside, just
waiting to be picked up. It might have driven me mad; but I was always
a pretty stubborn one, so I just held on and bided my time.

“At last it seemed to me to have come. I was changed from Agra to
Madras, and from there to Blair Island in the Andamans. There are very
few white convicts at this settlement, and, as I had behaved well from
the first, I soon found myself a sort of privileged person. I was given
a hut in Hope Town, which is a small place on the slopes of Mount
Harriet, and I was left pretty much to myself. It is a dreary,
fever-stricken place, and all beyond our little clearings was infested
with wild cannibal natives, who were ready enough to blow a poisoned
dart at us if they saw a chance. There was digging, and ditching, and
yam-planting, and a dozen other things to be done, so we were busy
enough all day; though in the evening we had a little time to
ourselves. Among other things, I learned to dispense drugs for the
surgeon, and picked up a smattering of his knowledge. All the time I
was on the lookout for a chance of escape; but it is hundreds of miles
from any other land, and there is little or no wind in those seas: so
it was a terribly difficult job to get away.

“The surgeon, Dr. Somerton, was a fast, sporting young chap, and the
other young officers would meet in his rooms of an evening and play
cards. The surgery, where I used to make up my drugs, was next to his
sitting-room, with a small window between us. Often, if I felt
lonesome, I used to turn out the lamp in the surgery, and then,
standing there, I could hear their talk and watch their play. I am fond
of a hand at cards myself, and it was almost as good as having one to
watch the others. There was Major Sholto, Captain Morstan, and
Lieutenant Bromley Brown, who were in command of the native troops, and
there was the surgeon himself, and two or three prison-officials,
crafty old hands who played a nice sly safe game. A very snug little
party they used to make.

“Well, there was one thing which very soon struck me, and that was that
the soldiers used always to lose and the civilians to win. Mind, I
don’t say that there was anything unfair, but so it was. These
prison-chaps had done little else than play cards ever since they had
been at the Andamans, and they knew each other’s game to a point, while
the others just played to pass the time and threw their cards down
anyhow. Night after night the soldiers got up poorer men, and the
poorer they got the more keen they were to play. Major Sholto was the
hardest hit. He used to pay in notes and gold at first, but soon it
came to notes of hand and for big sums. He sometimes would win for a
few deals, just to give him heart, and then the luck would set in
against him worse than ever. All day he would wander about as black as
thunder, and he took to drinking a deal more than was good for him.

“One night he lost even more heavily than usual. I was sitting in my
hut when he and Captain Morstan came stumbling along on the way to
their quarters. They were bosom friends, those two, and never far
apart. The major was raving about his losses.

“‘It’s all up, Morstan,’ he was saying, as they passed my hut. ‘I shall
have to send in my papers. I am a ruined man.’

“‘Nonsense, old chap!’ said the other, slapping him upon the shoulder.
‘I’ve had a nasty facer myself, but—’ That was all I could hear, but it
was enough to set me thinking.

“A couple of days later Major Sholto was strolling on the beach: so I
took the chance of speaking to him.

“‘I wish to have your advice, major,’ said I.

“‘Well, Small, what is it?’ he asked, taking his cheroot from his lips.

“‘I wanted to ask you, sir,’ said I, ‘who is the proper person to whom
hidden treasure should be handed over. I know where half a million
worth lies, and, as I cannot use it myself, I thought perhaps the best
thing that I could do would be to hand it over to the proper
authorities, and then perhaps they would get my sentence shortened for
me.’

“‘Half a million, Small?’ he gasped, looking hard at me to see if I was
in earnest.

“‘Quite that, sir,—in jewels and pearls. It lies there ready for any
one. And the queer thing about it is that the real owner is outlawed
and cannot hold property, so that it belongs to the first comer.’

“‘To government, Small,’ he stammered,—‘to government.’ But he said it
in a halting fashion, and I knew in my heart that I had got him.

“‘You think, then, sir, that I should give the information to the
Governor-General?’ said I, quietly.

“‘Well, well, you must not do anything rash, or that you might repent.
Let me hear all about it, Small. Give me the facts.’

“I told him the whole story, with small changes so that he could not
identify the places. When I had finished he stood stock still and full
of thought. I could see by the twitch of his lip that there was a
struggle going on within him.

“‘This is a very important matter, Small,’ he said, at last. ‘You must
not say a word to any one about it, and I shall see you again soon.’

“Two nights later he and his friend Captain Morstan came to my hut in
the dead of the night with a lantern.

“‘I want you just to let Captain Morstan hear that story from your own
lips, Small,’ said he.

“I repeated it as I had told it before.

“‘It rings true, eh?’ said he. ‘It’s good enough to act upon?’

“Captain Morstan nodded.

“‘Look here, Small,’ said the major. ‘We have been talking it over, my
friend here and I, and we have come to the conclusion that this secret
of yours is hardly a government matter, after all, but is a private
concern of your own, which of course you have the power of disposing of
as you think best. Now, the question is, what price would you ask for
it? We might be inclined to take it up, and at least look into it, if
we could agree as to terms.’ He tried to speak in a cool, careless way,
but his eyes were shining with excitement and greed.

“‘Why, as to that, gentlemen,’ I answered, trying also to be cool, but
feeling as excited as he did, ‘there is only one bargain which a man in
my position can make. I shall want you to help me to my freedom, and to
help my three companions to theirs. We shall then take you into
partnership, and give you a fifth share to divide between you.’

“‘Hum!’ said he. ‘A fifth share! That is not very tempting.’

“‘It would come to fifty thousand apiece,’ said I.

“‘But how can we gain your freedom? You know very well that you ask an
impossibility.’

“‘Nothing of the sort,’ I answered. ‘I have thought it all out to the
last detail. The only bar to our escape is that we can get no boat fit
for the voyage, and no provisions to last us for so long a time. There
are plenty of little yachts and yawls at Calcutta or Madras which would
serve our turn well. Do you bring one over. We shall engage to get
aboard her by night, and if you will drop us on any part of the Indian
coast you will have done your part of the bargain.’

“‘If there were only one,’ he said.

“‘None or all,’ I answered. ‘We have sworn it. The four of us must
always act together.’

“‘You see, Morstan,’ said he, ‘Small is a man of his word. He does not
flinch from his friend. I think we may very well trust him.’

“‘It’s a dirty business,’ the other answered. ‘Yet, as you say, the
money would save our commissions handsomely.’

“‘Well, Small,’ said the major, ‘we must, I suppose, try and meet you.
We must first, of course, test the truth of your story. Tell me where
the box is hid, and I shall get leave of absence and go back to India
in the monthly relief-boat to inquire into the affair.’

“‘Not so fast,’ said I, growing colder as he got hot. ‘I must have the
consent of my three comrades. I tell you that it is four or none with
us.’

“‘Nonsense!’ he broke in. ‘What have three black fellows to do with our
agreement?’

“‘Black or blue,’ said I, ‘they are in with me, and we all go
together.’

“Well, the matter ended by a second meeting, at which Mahomet Singh,
Abdullah Khan, and Dost Akbar were all present. We talked the matter
over again, and at last we came to an arrangement. We were to provide
both the officers with charts of the part of the Agra fort and mark the
place in the wall where the treasure was hid. Major Sholto was to go to
India to test our story. If he found the box he was to leave it there,
to send out a small yacht provisioned for a voyage, which was to lie
off Rutland Island, and to which we were to make our way, and finally
to return to his duties. Captain Morstan was then to apply for leave of
absence, to meet us at Agra, and there we were to have a final division
of the treasure, he taking the major’s share as well as his own. All
this we sealed by the most solemn oaths that the mind could think or
the lips utter. I sat up all night with paper and ink, and by the
morning I had the two charts all ready, signed with the sign of
four,—that is, of Abdullah, Akbar, Mahomet, and myself.

“Well, gentlemen, I weary you with my long story, and I know that my
friend Mr. Jones is impatient to get me safely stowed in chokey. I’ll
make it as short as I can. The villain Sholto went off to India, but he
never came back again. Captain Morstan showed me his name among a list
of passengers in one of the mail-boats very shortly afterwards. His
uncle had died, leaving him a fortune, and he had left the army, yet he
could stoop to treat five men as he had treated us. Morstan went over
to Agra shortly afterwards, and found, as we expected, that the
treasure was indeed gone. The scoundrel had stolen it all, without
carrying out one of the conditions on which we had sold him the secret.
From that day I lived only for vengeance. I thought of it by day and I
nursed it by night. It became an overpowering, absorbing passion with
me. I cared nothing for the law,—nothing for the gallows. To escape, to
track down Sholto, to have my hand upon his throat,—that was my one
thought. Even the Agra treasure had come to be a smaller thing in my
mind than the slaying of Sholto.

“Well, I have set my mind on many things in this life, and never one
which I did not carry out. But it was weary years before my time came.
I have told you that I had picked up something of medicine. One day
when Dr. Somerton was down with a fever a little Andaman Islander was
picked up by a convict-gang in the woods. He was sick to death, and had
gone to a lonely place to die. I took him in hand, though he was as
venomous as a young snake, and after a couple of months I got him all
right and able to walk. He took a kind of fancy to me then, and would
hardly go back to his woods, but was always hanging about my hut. I
learned a little of his lingo from him, and this made him all the
fonder of me.

“Tonga—for that was his name—was a fine boatman, and owned a big, roomy
canoe of his own. When I found that he was devoted to me and would do
anything to serve me, I saw my chance of escape. I talked it over with
him. He was to bring his boat round on a certain night to an old wharf
which was never guarded, and there he was to pick me up. I gave him
directions to have several gourds of water and a lot of yams,
cocoa-nuts, and sweet potatoes.

“He was stanch and true, was little Tonga. No man ever had a more
faithful mate. At the night named he had his boat at the wharf. As it
chanced, however, there was one of the convict-guard down there,—a vile
Pathan who had never missed a chance of insulting and injuring me. I
had always vowed vengeance, and now I had my chance. It was as if fate
had placed him in my way that I might pay my debt before I left the
island. He stood on the bank with his back to me, and his carbine on
his shoulder. I looked about for a stone to beat out his brains with,
but none could I see. Then a queer thought came into my head and showed
me where I could lay my hand on a weapon. I sat down in the darkness
and unstrapped my wooden leg. With three long hops I was on him. He put
his carbine to his shoulder, but I struck him full, and knocked the
whole front of his skull in. You can see the split in the wood now
where I hit him. We both went down together, for I could not keep my
balance, but when I got up I found him still lying quiet enough. I made
for the boat, and in an hour we were well out at sea. Tonga had brought
all his earthly possessions with him, his arms and his gods. Among
other things, he had a long bamboo spear, and some Andaman cocoa-nut
matting, with which I made a sort of sail. For ten days we were beating
about, trusting to luck, and on the eleventh we were picked up by a
trader which was going from Singapore to Jiddah with a cargo of Malay
pilgrims. They were a rum crowd, and Tonga and I soon managed to settle
down among them. They had one very good quality: they let you alone and
asked no questions.

“Well, if I were to tell you all the adventures that my little chum and
I went through, you would not thank me, for I would have you here until
the sun was shining. Here and there we drifted about the world,
something always turning up to keep us from London. All the time,
however, I never lost sight of my purpose. I would dream of Sholto at
night. A hundred times I have killed him in my sleep. At last, however,
some three or four years ago, we found ourselves in England. I had no
great difficulty in finding where Sholto lived, and I set to work to
discover whether he had realised the treasure, or if he still had it. I
made friends with someone who could help me,—I name no names, for I
don’t want to get any one else in a hole,—and I soon found that he
still had the jewels. Then I tried to get at him in many ways; but he
was pretty sly, and had always two prize-fighters, besides his sons and
his khitmutgar, on guard over him.

“One day, however, I got word that he was dying. I hurried at once to
the garden, mad that he should slip out of my clutches like that, and,
looking through the window, I saw him lying in his bed, with his sons
on each side of him. I’d have come through and taken my chance with the
three of them, only even as I looked at him his jaw dropped, and I knew
that he was gone. I got into his room that same night, though, and I
searched his papers to see if there was any record of where he had
hidden our jewels. There was not a line, however: so I came away,
bitter and savage as a man could be. Before I left I bethought me that
if I ever met my Sikh friends again it would be a satisfaction to know
that I had left some mark of our hatred; so I scrawled down the sign of
the four of us, as it had been on the chart, and I pinned it on his
bosom. It was too much that he should be taken to the grave without
some token from the men whom he had robbed and befooled.

“We earned a living at this time by my exhibiting poor Tonga at fairs
and other such places as the black cannibal. He would eat raw meat and
dance his war-dance: so we always had a hatful of pennies after a day’s
work. I still heard all the news from Pondicherry Lodge, and for some
years there was no news to hear, except that they were hunting for the
treasure. At last, however, came what we had waited for so long. The
treasure had been found. It was up at the top of the house, in Mr.
Bartholomew Sholto’s chemical laboratory. I came at once and had a look
at the place, but I could not see how with my wooden leg I was to make
my way up to it. I learned, however, about a trap-door in the roof, and
also about Mr. Sholto’s supper-hour. It seemed to me that I could
manage the thing easily through Tonga. I brought him out with me with a
long rope wound round his waist. He could climb like a cat, and he soon
made his way through the roof, but, as ill luck would have it,
Bartholomew Sholto was still in the room, to his cost. Tonga thought he
had done something very clever in killing him, for when I came up by
the rope I found him strutting about as proud as a peacock. Very much
surprised was he when I made at him with the rope’s end and cursed him
for a little blood-thirsty imp. I took the treasure-box and let it
down, and then slid down myself, having first left the sign of the four
upon the table, to show that the jewels had come back at last to those
who had most right to them. Tonga then pulled up the rope, closed the
window, and made off the way that he had come.

“I don’t know that I have anything else to tell you. I had heard a
waterman speak of the speed of Smith’s launch the _Aurora_, so I
thought she would be a handy craft for our escape. I engaged with old
Smith, and was to give him a big sum if he got us safe to our ship. He
knew, no doubt, that there was some screw loose, but he was not in our
secrets. All this is the truth, and if I tell it to you, gentlemen, it
is not to amuse you,—for you have not done me a very good turn,—but it
is because I believe the best defence I can make is just to hold back
nothing, but let all the world know how badly I have myself been served
by Major Sholto, and how innocent I am of the death of his son.”

“A very remarkable account,” said Sherlock Holmes. “A fitting wind-up
to an extremely interesting case. There is nothing at all new to me in
the latter part of your narrative, except that you brought your own
rope. That I did not know. By the way, I had hoped that Tonga had lost
all his darts; yet he managed to shoot one at us in the boat.”

“He had lost them all, sir, except the one which was in his blow-pipe
at the time.”

“Ah, of course,” said Holmes. “I had not thought of that.”

“Is there any other point which you would like to ask about?” asked the
convict, affably.

“I think not, thank you,” my companion answered.

“Well, Holmes,” said Athelney Jones, “You are a man to be humoured, and
we all know that you are a connoisseur of crime, but duty is duty, and
I have gone rather far in doing what you and your friend asked me. I
shall feel more at ease when we have our story-teller here safe under
lock and key. The cab still waits, and there are two inspectors
downstairs. I am much obliged to you both for your assistance. Of
course you will be wanted at the trial. Good-night to you.”

“Good-night, gentlemen both,” said Jonathan Small.

“You first, Small,” remarked the wary Jones as they left the room.
“I’ll take particular care that you don’t club me with your wooden leg,
whatever you may have done to the gentleman at the Andaman Isles.”

“Well, and there is the end of our little drama,” I remarked, after we
had set some time smoking in silence. “I fear that it may be the last
investigation in which I shall have the chance of studying your
methods. Miss Morstan has done me the honour to accept me as a husband
in prospective.”

He gave a most dismal groan. “I feared as much,” said he. “I really
cannot congratulate you.”

I was a little hurt. “Have you any reason to be dissatisfied with my
choice?” I asked.

“Not at all. I think she is one of the most charming young ladies I
ever met, and might have been most useful in such work as we have been
doing. She had a decided genius that way: witness the way in which she
preserved that Agra plan from all the other papers of her father. But
love is an emotional thing, and whatever is emotional is opposed to
that true cold reason which I place above all things. I should never
marry myself, lest I bias my judgment.”

“I trust,” said I, laughing, “that my judgment may survive the ordeal.
But you look weary.”

“Yes, the reaction is already upon me. I shall be as limp as a rag for
a week.”

“Strange,” said I, “how terms of what in another man I should call
laziness alternate with your fits of splendid energy and vigour.”

“Yes,” he answered, “there are in me the makings of a very fine loafer
and also of a pretty spry sort of fellow. I often think of those lines
of old Goethe,—

Schade dass die Natur nur _einen_ Mensch aus Dir schuf,
Denn zum würdigen Mann war und zum Schelmen der Stoff.


“By the way, _à propos_ of this Norwood business, you see that they
had, as I surmised, a confederate in the house, who could be none other
than Lal Rao, the butler: so Jones actually has the undivided honour of
having caught one fish in his great haul.”

“The division seems rather unfair,” I remarked. “You have done all the
work in this business. I get a wife out of it, Jones gets the credit,
pray what remains for you?”

“For me,” said Sherlock Holmes, “there still remains the
cocaine-bottle.” And he stretched his long white hand up for it.




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SIGN OF THE FOUR ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.




﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Wars of the Jews; Or, The History of the Destruction of Jerusalem
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Wars of the Jews; Or, The History of the Destruction of Jerusalem

Author: Flavius Josephus

Translator: William Whiston

Release date: October 1, 2001 [eBook #2850]
                Most recently updated: August 28, 2020

Language: English

Credits: Produced by David Reed, and David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WARS OF THE JEWS; OR, THE HISTORY OF THE DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM ***




Produced by David Reed, and David Widger




THE WARS OF THE JEWS

OR HISTORY OF THE DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM

By Flavius Josephus


Translated by William Whiston





Contents

 PREFACE



 BOOK I.

 CHAPTER 1.

 CHAPTER 2.

 CHAPTER 3.

 CHAPTER 4.

 CHAPTER 5.

 CHAPTER 6.

 CHAPTER 7.

 CHAPTER 8.

 CHAPTER 9.

 CHAPTER 10.

 CHAPTER 11.

 CHAPTER 12.

 CHAPTER 13.

 CHAPTER 14.

 CHAPTER 15.

 CHAPTER 16.

 CHAPTER 17.

 CHAPTER 18.

 CHAPTER 19.

 CHAPTER 20.

 CHAPTER 21.

 CHAPTER 22.

 CHAPTER 23.

 CHAPTER 24.

 CHAPTER 25.

 CHAPTER 26.

 CHAPTER 27.

 CHAPTER 28.

 CHAPTER 29.

 CHAPTER 30.

 CHAPTER 31.

 CHAPTER 32.

 CHAPTER 33.

 BOOK 2.

 CHAPTER 1.

 CHAPTER 2.

 CHAPTER 3.

 CHAPTER 4.

 CHAPTER 5.

 CHAPTER 6.

 CHAPTER 7.

 CHAPTER 8.

 CHAPTER 9.

 CHAPTER 10.

 CHAPTER 11.

 CHAPTER 12.

 CHAPTER 13.

 CHAPTER 14.

 CHAPTER 15.

 CHAPTER 16.

 CHAPTER 17.

 CHAPTER 18.

 CHAPTER 19.

 CHAPTER 9.

 CHAPTER 21.

 CHAPTER 22.

 BOOK III.

 CHAPTER 1.

 CHAPTER 2.

 CHAPTER 3.

 CHAPTER 4.

 CHAPTER 5.

 CHAPTER 6.

 CHAPTER 7.

 CHAPTER 8.

 CHAPTER 9.

 CHAPTER 10.

 BOOK IV.

 CHAPTER 1.

 CHAPTER 2.

 CHAPTER 3.

 CHAPTER 4.

 CHAPTER V.

 CHAPTER 6.

 CHAPTER 7.

 CHAPTER 8.

 CHAPTER 9.

 CHAPTER 10.

 CHAPTER 11.

 BOOK V.

 CHAPTER 1.

 CHAPTER 2.

 CHAPTER 3.

 CHAPTER 4.

 CHAPTER 5.

 CHAPTER 6.

 CHAPTER 7.

 CHAPTER 8.

 CHAPTER 9.

 CHAPTER 10.

 CHAPTER 11.

 CHAPTER 12.

 CHAPTER 13.

 BOOK VI.

 CHAPTER 1.

 CHAPTER 2.

 CHAPTER 3.

 CHAPTER 4.

 CHAPTER 5.

 CHAPTER 6.

 CHAPTER 7.

 CHAPTER 8.

 CHAPTER 9.

 CHAPTER 10.

 BOOK VII.

 CHAPTER 1.

 CHAPTER 2.

 CHAPTER 3.

 CHAPTER 4.

 CHAPTER V.

 CHAPTER 6.

 CHAPTER 7.

 CHAPTER 8.

 CHAPTER 9.

 CHAPTER 10.

 CHAPTER 11.








PREFACE

1. 1 Whereas the war which the Jews made with the Romans hath been the
greatest of all those, not only that have been in our times, but, in a
manner, of those that ever were heard of; both of those wherein cities
have fought against cities, or nations against nations; while some men
who were not concerned in the affairs themselves have gotten together
vain and contradictory stories by hearsay, and have written them down
after a sophistical manner; and while those that were there present
have given false accounts of things, and this either out of a humor of
flattery to the Romans, or of hatred towards the Jews; and while their
writings contain sometimes accusations, and sometimes encomiums, but no
where the accurate truth of the facts; I have proposed to myself,
for the sake of such as live under the government of the Romans, to
translate those books into the Greek tongue, which I formerly composed
in the language of our country, and sent to the Upper Barbarians; 2
Joseph, the son of Matthias, by birth a Hebrew, a priest also, and one
who at first fought against the Romans myself, and was forced to be
present at what was done afterwards, [am the author of this work].

2. Now at the time when this great concussion of affairs happened, the
affairs of the Romans were themselves in great disorder. Those Jews also
who were for innovations, then arose when the times were disturbed; they
were also in a flourishing condition for strength and riches, insomuch
that the affairs of the East were then exceeding tumultuous, while some
hoped for gain, and others were afraid of loss in such troubles; for the
Jews hoped that all of their nation which were beyond Euphrates would
have raised an insurrection together with them. The Gauls also, in the
neighborhood of the Romans, were in motion, and the Geltin were
not quiet; but all was in disorder after the death of Nero. And the
opportunity now offered induced many to aim at the royal power; and the
soldiery affected change, out of the hopes of getting money. I thought
it therefore an absurd thing to see the truth falsified in affairs of
such great consequence, and to take no notice of it; but to suffer those
Greeks and Romans that were not in the wars to be ignorant of these
things, and to read either flatteries or fictions, while the Parthians,
and the Babylonians, and the remotest Arabians, and those of our nation
beyond Euphrates, with the Adiabeni, by my means, knew accurately both
whence the war begun, what miseries it brought upon us, and after what
manner it ended.

3. It is true, these writers have the confidence to call their accounts
histories; wherein yet they seem to me to fail of their own purpose,
as well as to relate nothing that is sound. For they have a mind to
demonstrate the greatness of the Romans, while they still diminish and
lessen the actions of the Jews, as not discerning how it cannot be that
those must appear to be great who have only conquered those that were
little. Nor are they ashamed to overlook the length of the war, the
multitude of the Roman forces who so greatly suffered in it, or the
might of the commanders, whose great labors about Jerusalem will be
deemed inglorious, if what they achieved be reckoned but a small matter.

4. However, I will not go to the other extreme, out of opposition to
those men who extol the Romans nor will I determine to raise the actions
of my countrymen too high; but I will prosecute the actions of both
parties with accuracy. Yet shall I suit my language to the passions I am
under, as to the affairs I describe, and must be allowed to indulge some
lamentations upon the miseries undergone by my own country. For that it
was a seditious temper of our own that destroyed it, and that they were
the tyrants among the Jews who brought the Roman power upon us, who
unwillingly attacked us, and occasioned the burning of our holy temple,
Titus Caesar, who destroyed it, is himself a witness, who, during the
entire war, pitied the people who were kept under by the seditious, and
did often voluntarily delay the taking of the city, and allowed time to
the siege, in order to let the authors have opportunity for repentance.
But if any one makes an unjust accusation against us, when we speak so
passionately about the tyrants, or the robbers, or sorely bewail the
misfortunes of our country, let him indulge my affections herein, though
it be contrary to the rules for writing history; because it had so
come to pass, that our city Jerusalem had arrived at a higher degree of
felicity than any other city under the Roman government, and yet at last
fell into the sorest of calamities again. Accordingly, it appears to
me that the misfortunes of all men, from the beginning of the world, if
they be compared to these of the Jews 3 are not so considerable as they
were; while the authors of them were not foreigners neither. This makes
it impossible for me to contain my lamentations. But if any one be
inflexible in his censures of me, let him attribute the facts themselves
to the historical part, and the lamentations to the writer himself only.

5. However, I may justly blame the learned men among the Greeks, who,
when such great actions have been done in their own times, which, upon
the comparison, quite eclipse the old wars, do yet sit as judges of
those affairs, and pass bitter censures upon the labors of the best
writers of antiquity; which moderns, although they may be superior
to the old writers in eloquence, yet are they inferior to them in
the execution of what they intended to do. While these also write new
histories about the Assyrians and Medes, as if the ancient writers had
not described their affairs as they ought to have done; although these
be as far inferior to them in abilities as they are different in their
notions from them. For of old every one took upon them to write what
happened in his own time; where their immediate concern in the actions
made their promises of value; and where it must be reproachful to write
lies, when they must be known by the readers to be such. But then,
an undertaking to preserve the memory Of what hath not been before
recorded, and to represent the affairs of one's own time to those that
come afterwards, is really worthy of praise and commendation. Now he is
to be esteemed to have taken good pains in earnest, not who does no more
than change the disposition and order of other men's works, but he
who not only relates what had not been related before, but composes an
entire body of history of his own: accordingly, I have been at great
charges, and have taken very great pains [about this history], though
I be a foreigner; and do dedicate this work, as a memorial of great
actions, both to the Greeks and to the Barbarians. But for some of our
own principal men, their mouths are wide open, and their tongues loosed
presently, for gain and law-suits, but quite muzzled up when they are
to write history, where they must speak truth and gather facts together
with a great deal of pains; and so they leave the writing such histories
to weaker people, and to such as are not acquainted with the actions of
princes. Yet shall the real truth of historical facts be preferred by
us, how much soever it be neglected among the Greek historians.

6. To write concerning the Antiquities of the Jews, who they were
[originally], and how they revolted from the Egyptians, and what country
they traveled over, and what countries they seized upon afterward,
and how they were removed out of them, I think this not to be a fit
opportunity, and, on other accounts, also superfluous; and this because
many Jews before me have composed the histories of our ancestors very
exactly; as have some of the Greeks done it also, and have translated
our histories into their own tongue, and have not much mistaken the
truth in their histories. But then, where the writers of these affairs
and our prophets leave off, thence shall I take my rise, and begin my
history. Now as to what concerns that war which happened in my own time,
I will go over it very largely, and with all the diligence I am able;
but for what preceded mine own age, that I shall run over briefly.

7. [For example, I shall relate] how Antiochus, who was named Epiphanes,
took Jerusalem by force, and held it three years and three months, and
was then ejected out of the country by the sons of Asamoneus: after
that, how their posterity quarreled about the government, and brought
upon their settlement the Romans and Pompey; how Herod also, the son of
Antipater, dissolved their government, and brought Sosins upon them; as
also how our people made a sedition upon Herod's death, while Augustus
was the Roman emperor, and Quintilius Varus was in that country; and
how the war broke out in the twelfth year of Nero, with what happened to
Cestius; and what places the Jews assaulted in a hostile manner in the
first sallies of the war.

8. As also [I shall relate] how they built walls about the neighboring
cities; and how Nero, upon Cestius's defeat, was in fear of the entire
event of the war, and thereupon made Vespasian general in this war; and
how this Vespasian, with the elder of his sons 4 made an expedition into
the country of Judea; what was the number of the Roman army that he made
use of; and how many of his auxiliaries were cut off in all Galilee;
and how he took some of its cities entirely, and by force, and others
of them by treaty, and on terms. Now, when I am come so far, I shall
describe the good order of the Romans in war, and the discipline of
their legions; the amplitude of both the Galilees, with its nature, and
the limits of Judea. And, besides this, I shall particularly go over
what is peculiar to the country, the lakes and fountains that are in
them, and what miseries happened to every city as they were taken; and
all this with accuracy, as I saw the things done, or suffered in them.
For I shall not conceal any of the calamities I myself endured, since I
shall relate them to such as know the truth of them.

9. After this, [I shall relate] how, When the Jews' affairs were
become very bad, Nero died, and Vespasian, when he was going to attack
Jerusalem, was called back to take the government upon him; what signs
happened to him relating to his gaining that government, and what
mutations of government then happened at Rome, and how he was
unwillingly made emperor by his soldiers; and how, upon his departure to
Egypt, to take upon him the government of the empire, the affairs of
the Jews became very tumultuous; as also how the tyrants rose up against
them, and fell into dissensions among themselves.

10. Moreover, [I shall relate] how Titus marched out of Egypt into Judea
the second time; as also how, and where, and how many forces he got
together; and in what state the city was, by the means of the seditious,
at his coming; what attacks he made, and how many ramparts he cast up;
of the three walls that encompassed the city, and of their measures;
of the strength of the city, and the structure of the temple and holy
house; and besides, the measures of those edifices, and of the altar,
and all accurately determined. A description also of certain of
their festivals, and seven purifications of purity, 5 and the sacred
ministrations of the priests, with the garments of the priests, and
of the high priests; and of the nature of the most holy place of the
temple; without concealing any thing, or adding any thing to the known
truth of things.

11. After this, I shall relate the barbarity of the tyrants towards the
people of their own nation, as well as the indulgence of the Romans in
sparing foreigners; and how often Titus, out of his desire to preserve
the city and the temple, invited the seditious to come to terms of
accommodation. I shall also distinguish the sufferings of the people,
and their calamities; how far they were afflicted by the sedition, and
how far by the famine, and at length were taken. Nor shall I omit to
mention the misfortunes of the deserters, nor the punishments inflicted
on the captives; as also how the temple was burnt, against the consent
of Caesar; and how many sacred things that had been laid up in the
temple were snatched out of the fire; the destruction also of the entire
city, with the signs and wonders that went before it; and the taking the
tyrants captives, and the multitude of those that were made slaves,
and into what different misfortunes they were every one distributed.
Moreover, what the Romans did to the remains of the wall; and how they
demolished the strong holds that were in the country; and how Titus
went over the whole country, and settled its affairs; together with his
return into Italy, and his triumph.

12. I have comprehended all these things in seven books, and have left
no occasion for complaint or accusation to such as have been acquainted
with this war; and I have written it down for the sake of those that
love truth, but not for those that please themselves [with fictitious
relations]. And I will begin my account of these things with what I call
my First Chapter.

WAR PREFACE FOOTNOTES

1 (return) [ I have already observed more than once, that this History
of the Jewish War was Josephus's first work, and published about A.D.
75, when he was but thirty-eight years of age; and that when he wrote
it, he was not thoroughly acquainted with several circumstances of
history from the days of Antiochus Epiphanes, with which it begins, till
near his own times, contained in the first and former part of the
second book, and so committed many involuntary errors therein. That he
published his Antiquities eighteen years afterward, in the thirteenth
year of Domitian, A.D. 93, when he was much more completely acquainted
with those ancient times, and after he had perused those most authentic
histories, the First Book of Maccabees, and the Chronicles of the
Priesthood of John Hyrcanus, etc. That accordingly he then reviewed
those parts of this work, and gave the public a more faithful, complete,
and accurate account of the facts therein related; and honestly
corrected the errors he had before run into.]


2 (return) [ Who these Upper Barbarians, remote from the sea, were,
Josephus himself will inform us, sect. 2, viz. the Parthians and
Babylonians, and remotest Arabians [of the Jews among them]; besides the
Jews beyond Euphrates, and the Adiabeni, or Assyrians. Whence we also
learn that these Parthians, Babylonians, the remotest Arabians, [or at
least the Jews among them,] as also the Jews beyond Euphrates, and
the Adiabeni, or Assyrians, understood Josephus's Hebrew, or rather
Chaldaic, books of The Jewish War, before they were put into the Greek
language.]


3 (return) [ That these calamities of the Jews, who were our Savior's
murderers, were to be the greatest that had ever been since the beginning
of the world, our Savior had directly foretold, Matthew 24:21; Mark
13:19; Luke 21:23, 24; and that they proved to be such accordingly,
Josephus is here a most authentic witness.]


4 (return) [ Titus.]


5 (return) [ These seven, or rather five, degrees of purity, or
purification, are enumerated hereafter, B. V. ch. 5. sect. 6. The
Rabbins make ten degrees of them, as Reland there informs us.]







BOOK I.


     Containing The Interval Of One Hundred And Sixty-Seven
     Years.

     From The Taking Of Jerusalem By Antiochus Epiphanes,
     To The Death Of Herod The Great.





CHAPTER 1.


     How The City Jerusalem Was Taken, And The Temple Pillaged
     [By Antiochus Epiphanes]. As Also Concerning The Actions Of
     The Maccabees, Matthias And Judas; And Concerning The Death
     Of Judas.

1. At the same time that Antiochus, who was called Epiphanes, had a
quarrel with the sixth Ptolemy about his right to the whole country of
Syria, a great sedition fell among the men of power in Judea, and they
had a contention about obtaining the government; while each of those
that were of dignity could not endure to be subject to their equals.
However, Onias, one of the high priests, got the better, and cast the
sons of Tobias out of the city; who fled to Antiochus, and besought
him to make use of them for his leaders, and to make an expedition into
Judea. The king being thereto disposed beforehand, complied with them,
and came upon the Jews with a great army, and took their city by force,
and slew a great multitude of those that favored Ptolemy, and sent out
his soldiers to plunder them without mercy. He also spoiled the temple,
and put a stop to the constant practice of offering a daily sacrifice
of expiation for three years and six months. But Onias, the high
priest, fled to Ptolemy, and received a place from him in the Nomus of
Heliopolis, where he built a city resembling Jerusalem, and a temple
that was like its temple 1 concerning which we shall speak more in its
proper place hereafter.

2. Now Antiochus was not satisfied either with his unexpected taking
the city, or with its pillage, or with the great slaughter he had made
there; but being overcome with his violent passions, and remembering
what he had suffered during the siege, he compelled the Jews to dissolve
the laws of their country, and to keep their infants uncircumcised,
and to sacrifice swine's flesh upon the altar; against which they all
opposed themselves, and the most approved among them were put to death.
Bacchides also, who was sent to keep the fortresses, having these wicked
commands, joined to his own natural barbarity, indulged all sorts of the
extremest wickedness, and tormented the worthiest of the inhabitants,
man by man, and threatened their city every day with open destruction,
till at length he provoked the poor sufferers by the extremity of his
wicked doings to avenge themselves.

3. Accordingly Matthias, the son of Asamoneus, one of the priests who
lived in a village called Modin, armed himself, together with his
own family, which had five sons of his in it, and slew Bacchides with
daggers; and thereupon, out of the fear of the many garrisons [of the
enemy], he fled to the mountains; and so many of the people followed
him, that he was encouraged to come down from the mountains, and to give
battle to Antiochus's generals, when he beat them, and drove them out of
Judea. So he came to the government by this his success, and became
the prince of his own people by their own free consent, and then died,
leaving the government to Judas, his eldest son.

4. Now Judas, supposing that Antiochus would not lie still, gathered an
army out of his own countrymen, and was the first that made a league of
friendship with the Romans, and drove Epiphanes out of the country when
he had made a second expedition into it, and this by giving him a great
defeat there; and when he was warmed by this great success, he made an
assault upon the garrison that was in the city, for it had not been cut
off hitherto; so he ejected them out of the upper city, and drove the
soldiers into the lower, which part of the city was called the Citadel.
He then got the temple under his power, and cleansed the whole
place, and walled it round about, and made new vessels for sacred
ministrations, and brought them into the temple, because the former
vessels had been profaned. He also built another altar, and began to
offer the sacrifices; and when the city had already received its sacred
constitution again, Antiochus died; whose son Antiochus succeeded him in
the kingdom, and in his hatred to the Jews also.

5. So this Antiochus got together fifty thousand footmen, and five
thousand horsemen, and fourscore elephants, and marched through Judea
into the mountainous parts. He then took Bethsura, which was a small
city; but at a place called Bethzacharis, where the passage was narrow,
Judas met him with his army. However, before the forces joined battle,
Judas's brother Eleazar, seeing the very highest of the elephants
adorned with a large tower, and with military trappings of gold to guard
him, and supposing that Antiochus himself was upon him, he ran a great
way before his own army, and cutting his way through the enemy's troops,
he got up to the elephant; yet could he not reach him who seemed to be
the king, by reason of his being so high; but still he ran his weapon
into the belly of the beast, and brought him down upon himself, and was
crushed to death, having done no more than attempted great things, and
showed that he preferred glory before life. Now he that governed the
elephant was but a private man; and had he proved to be Antiochus,
Eleazar had performed nothing more by this bold stroke than that it
might appear he chose to die, when he had the bare hope of thereby
doing a glorious action; nay, this disappointment proved an omen to his
brother [Judas] how the entire battle would end. It is true that the
Jews fought it out bravely for a long time, but the king's forces,
being superior in number, and having fortune on their side, obtained
the victory. And when a great many of his men were slain, Judas took the
rest with him, and fled to the toparchy of Gophna. So Antiochus went to
Jerusalem, and staid there but a few days, for he wanted provisions,
and so he went his way. He left indeed a garrison behind him, such as he
thought sufficient to keep the place, but drew the rest of his army off,
to take their winter-quarters in Syria.

6. Now, after the king was departed, Judas was not idle; for as many of
his own nation came to him, so did he gather those that had escaped out
of the battle together, and gave battle again to Antiochus's generals
at a village called Adasa; and being too hard for his enemies in the
battle, and killing a great number of them, he was at last himself slain
also. Nor was it many days afterward that his brother John had a plot
laid against him by Antiochus's party, and was slain by them.






CHAPTER 2.


     Concerning The Successors Of Judas, Who Were Jonathan And
     Simon, And John Hyrcanus.

1. When Jonathan, who was Judas's brother, succeeded him, he behaved
himself with great circumspection in other respects, with relation to
his own people; and he corroborated his authority by preserving his
friendship with the Romans. He also made a league with Antiochus the
son. Yet was not all this sufficient for his security; for the tyrant
Trypho, who was guardian to Antiochus's son, laid a plot against
him; and besides that, endeavored to take off his friends, and caught
Jonathan by a wile, as he was going to Ptolemais to Antiochus, with
a few persons in his company, and put him in bonds, and then made an
expedition against the Jews; but when he was afterward driven away by
Simon, who was Jonathan's brother, and was enraged at his defeat, he put
Jonathan to death.

2. However, Simon managed the public affairs after a courageous manner,
and took Gazara, and Joppa, and Jamnia, which were cities in his
neighborhood. He also got the garrison under, and demolished the
citadel. He was afterward an auxiliary to Antiochus, against Trypho,
whom he besieged in Dora, before he went on his expedition against the
Medes; yet could not he make the king ashamed of his ambition, though
he had assisted him in killing Trypho; for it was not long ere Antiochus
sent Cendebeus his general with an army to lay waste Judea, and to
subdue Simon; yet he, though he was now in years, conducted the war
as if he were a much younger man. He also sent his sons with a band of
strong men against Antiochus, while he took part of the army himself
with him, and fell upon him from another quarter. He also laid a great
many men in ambush in many places of the mountains, and was superior
in all his attacks upon them; and when he had been conqueror after so
glorious a manner, he was made high priest, and also freed the Jews from
the dominion of the Macedonians, after one hundred and seventy years of
the empire [of Seleucus].

3. This Simon also had a plot laid against him, and was slain at a feast
by his son-in-law Ptolemy, who put his wife and two sons into prison,
and sent some persons to kill John, who was also called Hyrcanus. 2
But when the young man was informed of their coming beforehand, he
made haste to get to the city, as having a very great confidence in the
people there, both on account of the memory of the glorious actions of
his father, and of the hatred they could not but bear to the injustice
of Ptolemy. Ptolemy also made an attempt to get into the city by another
gate; but was repelled by the people, who had just then admitted of
Hyrcanus; so he retired presently to one of the fortresses that were
about Jericho, which was called Dagon. Now when Hyrcanus had received
the high priesthood, which his father had held before, and had offered
sacrifice to God, he made great haste to attack Ptolemy, that he might
afford relief to his mother and brethren.

4. So he laid siege to the fortress, and was superior to Ptolemy in
other respects, but was overcome by him as to the just affection [he had
for his relations]; for when Ptolemy was distressed, he brought forth
his mother, and his brethren, and set them upon the wall, and beat them
with rods in every body's sight, and threatened, that unless he would
go away immediately, he would throw them down headlong; at which sight
Hyrcanus's commiseration and concern were too hard for his anger. But
his mother was not dismayed, neither at the stripes she received, nor
at the death with which she was threatened; but stretched out her hands,
and prayed her son not to be moved with the injuries that she suffered
to spare the wretch; since it was to her better to die by the means of
Ptolemy, than to live ever so long, provided he might be punished for
the injuries he done to their family. Now John's case was this: When
he considered the courage of his mother, and heard her entreaty, he set
about his attacks; but when he saw her beaten, and torn to pieces
with the stripes, he grew feeble, and was entirely overcome by his
affections. And as the siege was delayed by this means, the year of rest
came on, upon which the Jews rest every seventh year as they do on
every seventh day. On this year, therefore, Ptolemy was freed from being
besieged, and slew the brethren of John, with their mother, and fled to
Zeno, who was also called Cotylas, who was tyrant of Philadelphia.

5. And now Antiochus was so angry at what he had suffered from Simon,
that he made an expedition into Judea, and sat down before Jerusalem and
besieged Hyrcanus; but Hyrcanus opened the sepulcher of David, who was
the richest of all kings, and took thence about three thousand talents
in money, and induced Antiochus, by the promise of three thousand
talents, to raise the siege. Moreover, he was the first of the Jews that
had money enough, and began to hire foreign auxiliaries also.

6. However, at another time, when Antiochus was gone upon an expedition
against the Medes, and so gave Hyrcanus an opportunity of being revenged
upon him, he immediately made an attack upon the cities of Syria, as
thinking, what proved to be the case with them, that he should find them
empty of good troops. So he took Medaba and Samea, with the towns in
their neighborhood, as also Shechem, and Gerizzim; and besides these,
[he subdued] the nation of the Cutheans, who dwelt round about that
temple which was built in imitation of the temple at Jerusalem; he also
took a great many other cities of Idumea, with Adoreon and Marissa.
7. He also proceeded as far as Samaria, where is now the city Sebaste,
which was built by Herod the king, and encompassed it all round with a
wall, and set his sons, Aristobulus and Antigonus, over the siege; who
pushed it on so hard, that a famine so far prevailed within the city,
that they were forced to eat what never was esteemed food. They
also invited Antiochus, who was called Cyzicenus, to come to their
assistance; whereupon he got ready, and complied with their invitation,
but was beaten by Aristobulus and Antigonus; and indeed he was pursued
as far as Scythopolis by these brethren, and fled away from them. So
they returned back to Samaria, and shut the multitude again within the
wall; and when they had taken the city, they demolished it, and made
slaves of its inhabitants. And as they had still great success in their
undertakings, they did not suffer their zeal to cool, but marched with
an army as far as Scythopolis, and made an incursion upon it, and laid
waste all the country that lay within Mount Carmel.

8. But then these successes of John and of his sons made them be envied,
and occasioned a sedition in the country; and many there were who got
together, and would not be at rest till they brake out into open war,
in which war they were beaten. So John lived the rest of his life very
happily, and administered the government after a most extraordinary
manner, and this for thirty-three entire years together. He died,
leaving five sons behind him. He was certainly a very happy man, and
afforded no occasion to have any complaint made of fortune on his
account. He it was who alone had three of the most desirable things in
the world,--the government of his nation, and the high priesthood, and
the gift of prophecy. For the Deity conversed with him, and he was
not ignorant of any thing that was to come afterward; insomuch that he
foresaw and foretold that his two eldest sons would not continue masters
of the government; and it will highly deserve our narration to describe
their catastrophe, and how far inferior these men were to their father
in felicity.






CHAPTER 3.


     How Aristobulus Was The First That Put A Diadem About His
     Head; And After He Had Put His Mother And Brother To Death,
     Died Himself, When He Had Reigned No More Than A Year.

1. For after the death of their father, the elder of them, Aristobulus,
changed the government into a kingdom, and was the first that put a
diadem upon his head, four hundred seventy and one years and three
months after our people came down into this country, when they were set
free from the Babylonian slavery. Now, of his brethren, he appeared to
have an affection for Antigonus, who was next to him, and made him his
equal; but for the rest, he bound them, and put them in prison. He also
put his mother in bonds, for her contesting the government with him;
for John had left her to be the governess of public affairs. He also
proceeded to that degree of barbarity as to cause her to be pined to
death in prison.

2. But vengeance circumvented him in the affair of his brother
Antigonus, whom he loved, and whom he made his partner in the kingdom;
for he slew him by the means of the calumnies which ill men about the
palace contrived against him. At first, indeed, Aristobulus would
not believe their reports, partly out of the affection he had for his
brother, and partly because he thought that a great part of these tales
were owing to the envy of their relaters: however, as Antigonus came
once in a splendid manner from the army to that festival, wherein our
ancient custom is to make tabernacles for God, it happened, in those
days, that Aristobulus was sick, and that, at the conclusion of the
feast, Antigonus came up to it, with his armed men about him; and this
when he was adorned in the finest manner possible; and that, in a great
measure, to pray to God on the behalf of his brother. Now at this very
time it was that these ill men came to the king, and told him in what
a pompous manner the armed men came, and with what insolence Antigonus
marched, and that such his insolence was too great for a private person,
and that accordingly he was come with a great band of men to kill him;
for that he could not endure this bare enjoyment of royal honor, when it
was in his power to take the kingdom himself.

3. Now Aristobulus, by degrees, and unwillingly, gave credit to these
accusations; and accordingly he took care not to discover his suspicion
openly, though he provided to be secure against any accidents; so he
placed the guards of his body in a certain dark subterranean passage;
for he lay sick in a place called formerly the Citadel, though
afterwards its name was changed to Antonia; and he gave orders that if
Antigonus came unarmed, they should let him alone; but if he came to him
in his armor, they should kill him. He also sent some to let him know
beforehand that he should come unarmed. But, upon this occasion, the
queen very cunningly contrived the matter with those that plotted his
ruin, for she persuaded those that were sent to conceal the king's
message; but to tell Antigonus how his brother had heard he had got a
very the suit of armor made with fine martial ornaments, in Galilee;
and because his present sickness hindered him from coming and seeing all
that finery, he very much desired to see him now in his armor; because,
said he, in a little time thou art going away from me.

4. As soon as Antigonus heard this, the good temper of his brother not
allowing him to suspect any harm from him, he came along with his armor
on, to show it to his brother; but when he was going along that dark
passage which was called Strato's Tower, he was slain by the body
guards, and became an eminent instance how calumny destroys all
good-will and natural affection, and how none of our good affections are
strong enough to resist envy perpetually.

5. And truly any one would be surprised at Judas upon this occasion. He
was of the sect of the Essens, and had never failed or deceived men in
his predictions before. Now this man saw Antigonus as he was passing
along by the temple, and cried out to his acquaintance, [they were not a
few who attended upon him as his scholars,] "O strange!" said he, "it is
good for me to die now, since truth is dead before me, and somewhat that
I have foretold hath proved false; for this Antigonus is this day alive,
who ought to have died this day; and the place where he ought to be
slain, according to that fatal decree, was Strato's Tower, which is at
the distance of six hundred furlongs from this place; and yet four hours
of this day are over already; which point of time renders the prediction
impossible to be fill filled." And when the old man had said this, he
was dejected in his mind, and so continued. But in a little time news
came that Antigonus was slain in a subterraneous place, which was itself
also called Strato's Tower, by the same name with that Cesarea which lay
by the sea-side; and this ambiguity it was which caused the prophet's
disorder.

6. Hereupon Aristobulus repented of the great crime he had been guilty
of, and this gave occasion to the increase of his distemper. He also
grew worse and worse, and his soul was constantly disturbed at the
thoughts of what he had done, till his very bowels being torn to pieces
by the intolerable grief he was under, he threw up a great quantity of
blood. And as one of those servants that attended him carried out that
blood, he, by some supernatural providence, slipped and fell down in the
very place where Antigonus had been slain; and so he spilt some of
the murderer's blood upon the spots of the blood of him that had been
murdered, which still appeared. Hereupon a lamentable cry arose among
the spectators, as if the servant had spilled the blood on purpose in
that place; and as the king heard that cry, he inquired what was the
cause of it; and while nobody durst tell him, he pressed them so much
the more to let him know what was the matter; so at length, when he had
threatened them, and forced them to speak out, they told; whereupon he
burst into tears, and groaned, and said, "So I perceive I am not like
to escape the all-seeing eye of God, as to the great crimes I have
committed; but the vengeance of the blood of my kinsman pursues me
hastily. O thou most impudent body! how long wilt thou retain a soul
that ought to die on account of that punishment it ought to suffer for a
mother and a brother slain! How long shall I myself spend my blood drop
by drop? let them take it all at once; and let their ghosts no longer be
disappointed by a few parcels of my bowels offered to them." As soon
as he had said these words, he presently died, when he had reigned no
longer than a year.






CHAPTER 4.


     What Actions Were Done By Alexander Janneus, Who Reigned
     Twenty-Seven Years.

1. And now the king's wife loosed the king's brethren, and made
Alexander king, who appeared both elder in age, and more moderate in his
temper than the rest; who, when he came to the government, slew one of
his brethren, as affecting to govern himself; but had the other of them
in great esteem, as loving a quiet life, without meddling with public
affairs.

2. Now it happened that there was a battle between him and Ptolemy, who
was called Lathyrus, who had taken the city Asochis. He indeed slew a
great many of his enemies, but the victory rather inclined to Ptolemy.
But when this Ptolemy was pursued by his mother Cleopatra, and retired
into Egypt, Alexander besieged Gadara, and took it; as also he did
Amathus, which was the strongest of all the fortresses that were about
Jordan, and therein were the most precious of all the possessions of
Theodorus, the son of Zeno. Whereupon Theodorus marched against him, and
took what belonged to himself as well as the king's baggage, and slew
ten thousand of the Jews. However, Alexander recovered this blow, and
turned his force towards the maritime parts, and took Raphia and Gaza,
with Anthedon also, which was afterwards called Agrippias by king Herod.

3. But when he had made slaves of the citizens of all these cities, the
nation of the Jews made an insurrection against him at a festival; for
at those feasts seditions are generally begun; and it looked as if he
should not be able to escape the plot they had laid for him, had not his
foreign auxiliaries, the Pisidians and Cilicians, assisted him; for as
to the Syrians, he never admitted them among his mercenary troops, on
account of their innate enmity against the Jewish nation. And when he
had slain more than six thousand of the rebels, he made an incursion
into Arabia; and when he had taken that country, together with the
Gileadires and Moabites, he enjoined them to pay him tribute, and
returned to Areathus; and as Theodorus was surprised at his great
success, he took the fortress, and demolished it.

4. However, when he fought with Obodas, king of the Arabians, who had
laid an ambush for him near Golan, and a plot against him, he lost his
entire army, which was crowded together in a deep valley, and broken to
pieces by the multitude of camels. And when he had made his escape to
Jerusalem, he provoked the multitude, which hated him before, to make
an insurrection against him, and this on account of the greatness of the
calamity that he was under. However, he was then too hard for them; and,
in the several battles that were fought on both sides, he slew not fewer
than fifty thousand of the Jews in the interval of six years. Yet had
he no reason to rejoice in these victories, since he did but consume his
own kingdom; till at length he left off fighting, and endeavored to
come to a composition with them, by talking with his subjects. But this
mutability and irregularity of his conduct made them hate him still
more. And when he asked them why they so hated him, and what he should
do in order to appease them, they said, by killing himself; for that it
would be then all they could do to be reconciled to him, who had done
such tragical things to them, even when he was dead. At the same time
they invited Demetrius, who was called Eucerus, to assist them; and as
he readily complied with their requests, in hopes of great advantages,
and came with his army, the Jews joined with those their auxiliaries
about Shechem.

5. Yet did Alexander meet both these forces with one thousand horsemen,
and eight thousand mercenaries that were on foot. He had also with him
that part of the Jews which favored him, to the number of ten thousand;
while the adverse party had three thousand horsemen, and fourteen
thousand footmen. Now, before they joined battle, the kings made
proclamation, and endeavored to draw off each other's soldiers, and make
them revolt; while Demetrius hoped to induce Alexander's mercenaries
to leave him, and Alexander hoped to induce the Jews that were with
Demetrius to leave him. But since neither the Jews would leave off their
rage, nor the Greeks prove unfaithful, they came to an engagement, and
to a close fight with their weapons. In which battle Demetrius was
the conqueror, although Alexander's mercenaries showed the greatest
exploits, both in soul and body. Yet did the upshot of this battle prove
different from what was expected, as to both of them; for neither did
those that invited Demetrius to come to them continue firm to him,
though he was conqueror; and six thousand Jews, out of pity to the
change of Alexander's condition, when he was fled to the mountains,
came over to him. Yet could not Demetrius bear this turn of affairs; but
supposing that Alexander was already become a match for him again, and
that all the nation would [at length] run to him, he left the country,
and went his way.

6. However, the rest of the [Jewish] multitude did not lay aside their
quarrels with him, when the [foreign] auxiliaries were gone; but they
had a perpetual war with Alexander, until he had slain the greatest part
of them, and driven the rest into the city Berneselis; and when he had
demolished that city, he carried the captives to Jerusalem. Nay, his
rage was grown so extravagant, that his barbarity proceeded to the
degree of impiety; for when he had ordered eight hundred to be hung upon
crosses in the midst of the city, he had the throats of their wives and
children cut before their eyes; and these executions he saw as he
was drinking and lying down with his concubines. Upon which so deep a
surprise seized on the people, that eight thousand of his opposers
fled away the very next night, out of all Judea, whose flight was only
terminated by Alexander's death; so at last, though not till late,
and with great difficulty, he, by such actions, procured quiet to his
kingdom, and left off fighting any more.

7. Yet did that Antiochus, who was also called Dionysius, become an
origin of troubles again. This man was the brother of Demetrius, and the
last of the race of the Seleucidae. 3 Alexander was afraid of him, when
he was marching against the Arabians; so he cut a deep trench between
Antipatris, which was near the mountains, and the shores of Joppa; he
also erected a high wall before the trench, and built wooden towers,
in order to hinder any sudden approaches. But still he was not able to
exclude Antiochus, for he burnt the towers, and filled up the trenches,
and marched on with his army. And as he looked upon taking his
revenge on Alexander, for endeavoring to stop him, as a thing of less
consequence, he marched directly against the Arabians, whose king
retired into such parts of the country as were fittest for engaging the
enemy, and then on the sudden made his horse turn back, which were in
number ten thousand, and fell upon Antiochus's army while they were in
disorder, and a terrible battle ensued. Antiochus's troops, so long as
he was alive, fought it out, although a mighty slaughter was made among
them by the Arabians; but when he fell, for he was in the forefront, in
the utmost danger, in rallying his troops, they all gave ground, and the
greatest part of his army were destroyed, either in the action or the
flight; and for the rest, who fled to the village of Cana, it happened
that they were all consumed by want of necessaries, a few only excepted.

8. About this time it was that the people of Damascus, out of their
hatred to Ptolemy, the son of Menhens, invited Aretas [to take the
government], and made him king of Celesyria. This man also made an
expedition against Judea, and beat Alexander in battle; but afterwards
retired by mutual agreement. But Alexander, when he had taken
Pella, marched to Gerasa again, out of the covetous desire he had of
Theodorus's possessions; and when he had built a triple wall about the
garrison, he took the place by force. He also demolished Golan, and
Seleucia, and what was called the Valley of Antiochus; besides which,
he took the strong fortress of Gamala, and stripped Demetrius, who was
governor therein, of what he had, on account of the many crimes laid to
his charge, and then returned into Judea, after he had been three whole
years in this expedition. And now he was kindly received of the nation,
because of the good success he had. So when he was at rest from war,
he fell into a distemper; for he was afflicted with a quartan ague, and
supposed that, by exercising himself again in martial affairs, he
should get rid of this distemper; but by making such expeditions at
unseasonable times, and forcing his body to undergo greater hardships
than it was able to bear, he brought himself to his end. He died,
therefore, in the midst of his troubles, after he had reigned seven and
twenty years.






CHAPTER 5.


     Alexandra Reigns Nine Years, During Which Time The Pharisees
     Were The Real Rulers Of The Nation.

1. Now Alexander left the kingdom to Alexandra his wife, and depended
upon it that the Jews would now very readily submit to her, because she
had been very averse to such cruelty as he had treated them with,
and had opposed his violation of their laws, and had thereby got the
good-will of the people. Nor was he mistaken as to his expectations; for
this woman kept the dominion, by the opinion that the people had of her
piety; for she chiefly studied the ancient customs of her country, and
cast those men out of the government that offended against their holy
laws. And as she had two sons by Alexander, she made Hyrcanus the elder
high priest, on account of his age, as also, besides that, on account of
his inactive temper, no way disposing him to disturb the public. But
she retained the younger, Aristobulus, with her as a private person, by
reason of the warmth of his temper.

2. And now the Pharisees joined themselves to her, to assist her in
the government. These are a certain sect of the Jews that appear more
religious than others, and seem to interpret the laws more accurately.
Now Alexandra hearkened to them to an extraordinary degree, as being
herself a woman of great piety towards God. But these Pharisees artfully
insinuated themselves into her favor by little and little, and became
themselves the real administrators of the public affairs: they banished
and reduced whom they pleased; they bound and loosed [men] at their
pleasure; 4 and, to say all at once, they had the enjoyment of the royal
authority, whilst the expenses and the difficulties of it belonged to
Alexandra. She was a sagacious woman in the management of great
affairs, and intent always upon gathering soldiers together; so that she
increased the army the one half, and procured a great body of foreign
troops, till her own nation became not only very powerful at home, but
terrible also to foreign potentates, while she governed other people,
and the Pharisees governed her.

3. Accordingly, they themselves slew Diogenes, a person of figure,
and one that had been a friend to Alexander; and accused him as having
assisted the king with his advice, for crucifying the eight hundred men
[before mentioned.] They also prevailed with Alexandra to put to death
the rest of those who had irritated him against them. Now she was so
superstitious as to comply with their desires, and accordingly they slew
whom they pleased themselves. But the principal of those that were in
danger fled to Aristobulus, who persuaded his mother to spare the men on
account of their dignity, but to expel them out of the city, unless she
took them to be innocent; so they were suffered to go unpunished, and
were dispersed all over the country. But when Alexandra sent out her
army to Damascus, under pretense that Ptolemy was always oppressing
that city, she got possession of it; nor did it make any considerable
resistance. She also prevailed with Tigranes, king of Armenia, who lay
with his troops about Ptolemais, and besieged Cleopatra, 5 by agreements
and presents, to go away. Accordingly, Tigranes soon arose from
the siege, by reason of those domestic tumults which happened upon
Lucullus's expedition into Armenia.

4. In the mean time, Alexandra fell sick, and Aristobulus, her younger
son, took hold of this opportunity, with his domestics, of which he had
a great many, who were all of them his friends, on account of the warmth
of their youth, and got possession of all the fortresses. He also used
the sums of money he found in them to get together a number of mercenary
soldiers, and made himself king; and besides this, upon Hyrcanus's
complaint to his mother, she compassionated his case, and put
Aristobulus's wife and sons under restraint in Antonia, which was a
fortress that joined to the north part of the temple. It was, as I have
already said, of old called the Citadel; but afterwards got the name of
Antonia, when Antony was [lord of the East], just as the other cities,
Sebaste and Agrippias, had their names changed, and these given them
from Sebastus and Agrippa. But Alexandra died before she could punish
Aristobulus for his disinheriting his brother, after she had reigned
nine years.






CHAPTER 6.


     When Hyrcanus Who Was Alexander's Heir, Receded From His
     Claim To The Crown Aristobulus Is Made King; And Afterward
     The Same Hyrcanus By The Means Of Antipater, Is Brought Back
     By Abetas. At Last Pompey Is Made The Arbitrator Of The
     Dispute Between The Brothers.

1. Now Hyrcanus was heir to the kingdom, and to him did his mother
commit it before she died; but Aristobulus was superior to him in power
and magnanimity; and when there was a battle between them, to decide
the dispute about the kingdom, near Jericho, the greatest part deserted
Hyrcanus, and went over to Aristobulus; but Hyrcanus, with those of his
party who staid with him, fled to Antonia, and got into his power the
hostages that might be for his preservation [which were Aristobulus's
wife, with her children]; but they came to an agreement before things
should come to extremities, that Aristobulus should be king, and
Hyrcanus should resign that up, but retain all the rest of his
dignities, as being the king's brother. Hereupon they were reconciled
to each other in the temple, and embraced one another in a very kind
manner, while the people stood round about them; they also changed their
houses, while Aristobulus went to the royal palace, and Hyrcanus retired
to the house of Aristobulus.

2. Now those other people which were at variance with Aristobulus were
afraid upon his unexpected obtaining the government; and especially this
concerned Antipater 6 whom Aristobulus hated of old. He was by birth
an Idumean, and one of the principal of that nation, on account of his
ancestors and riches, and other authority to him belonging: he also
persuaded Hyrcanus to fly to Aretas, the king of Arabia, and to lay
claim to the kingdom; as also he persuaded Aretas to receive Hyrcanus,
and to bring him back to his kingdom: he also cast great reproaches upon
Aristobulus, as to his morals, and gave great commendations to Hyrcanus,
and exhorted Aretas to receive him, and told him how becoming a filing
it would be for him, who ruled so great a kingdom, to afford his
assistance to such as are injured; alleging that Hyrcanus was treated
unjustly, by being deprived of that dominion which belonged to him by
the prerogative of his birth. And when he had predisposed them both to
do what he would have them, he took Hyrcanus by night, and ran away from
the city, and, continuing his flight with great swiftness, he escaped to
the place called Petra, which is the royal seat of the king of Arabia,
where he put Hyrcanus into Aretas's hand; and by discoursing much with
him, and gaining upon him with many presents, he prevailed with him
to give him an army that might restore him to his kingdom. This
army consisted of fifty thousand footmen and horsemen, against which
Aristobulus was not able to make resistance, but was deserted in his
first onset, and was driven to Jerusalem; he also had been taken
at first by force, if Scaurus, the Roman general, had not come and
seasonably interposed himself, and raised the siege. This Scaurus was
sent into Syria from Armenia by Pompey the Great, when he fought against
Tigranes; so Scaurus came to Damascus, which had been lately taken by
Metellus and Lollius, and caused them to leave the place; and, upon his
hearing how the affairs of Judea stood, he made haste thither as to a
certain booty.

3. As soon, therefore, as he was come into the country, there
came ambassadors from both the brothers, each of them desiring his
assistance; but Aristobulus's three hundred talents had more weight with
him than the justice of the cause; which sum, when Scaurus had received,
he sent a herald to Hyrcanus and the Arabians, and threatened them with
the resentment of the Romans and of Pompey, unless they would raise
the siege. So Aretas was terrified, and retired out of Judea to
Philadelphia, as did Scaurus return to Damascus again; nor was
Aristobulus satisfied with escaping [out of his brother's hands,] but
gathered all his forces together, and pursued his enemies, and fought
them at a place called Papyron, and slew about six thousand of them,
and, together with them Antipater's brother Phalion.

4. When Hyrcanus and Antipater were thus deprived of their hopes from
the Arabians, they transferred the same to their adversaries; and
because Pompey had passed through Syria, and was come to Damascus, they
fled to him for assistance; and, without any bribes, they made the same
equitable pleas that they had used to Aretas, and besought him to hate
the violent behavior of Aristobulus, and to bestow the kingdom on him
to whom it justly belonged, both on account of his good character and
on account of his superiority in age. However, neither was Aristobulus
wanting to himself in this case, as relying on the bribes that Scaurus
had received: he was also there himself, and adorned himself after
a manner the most agreeable to royalty that he was able. But he soon
thought it beneath him to come in such a servile manner, and could not
endure to serve his own ends in a way so much more abject than he was
used to; so he departed from Diospolis.

5. At this his behavior Pompey had great indignation; Hyrcanus also and
his friends made great intercessions to Pompey; so he took not only his
Roman forces, but many of his Syrian auxiliaries, and marched against
Aristobulus. But when he had passed by Pella and Scythopolis, and was
come to Corea, where you enter into the country of Judea, when you go
up to it through the Mediterranean parts, he heard that Aristobulus was
fled to Alexandrium, which is a strong hold fortified with the utmost
magnificence, and situated upon a high mountain; and he sent to him, and
commanded him to come down. Now his inclination was to try his fortune
in a battle, since he was called in such an imperious manner, rather
than to comply with that call. However, he saw the multitude were in
great fear, and his friends exhorted him to consider what the power of
the Romans was, and how it was irresistible; so he complied with their
advice, and came down to Pompey; and when he had made a long apology for
himself, and for the justness of his cause in taking the government,
he returned to the fortress. And when his brother invited him again [to
plead his cause], he came down and spake about the justice of it, and
then went away without any hinderance from Pompey; so he was between
hope and fear. And when he came down, it was to prevail with Pompey to
allow him the government entirely; and when he went up to the citadel,
it was that he might not appear to debase himself too low. However,
Pompey commanded him to give up his fortified places, and forced him to
write to every one of their governors to yield them up; they having
had this charge given them, to obey no letters but what were of his
own hand-writing. Accordingly he did what he was ordered to do; but had
still an indignation at what was done, and retired to Jerusalem, and
prepared to fight with Pompey.

6. But Pompey did not give him time to make any preparations [for a
siege], but followed him at his heels; he was also obliged to make haste
in his attempt, by the death of Mithridates, of which he was informed
about Jericho. Now here is the most fruitful country of Judea, which
bears a vast number of palm trees 7 besides the balsam tree, whose
sprouts they cut with sharp stones, and at the incisions they gather the
juice, which drops down like tears. So Pompey pitched his camp in that
place one night, and then hasted away the next morning to Jerusalem; but
Aristobulus was so affrighted at his approach, that he came and met him
by way of supplication. He also promised him money, and that he would
deliver up both himself and the city into his disposal, and thereby
mitigated the anger of Pompey. Yet did not he perform any of the
conditions he had agreed to; for Aristobulus's party would not so much
as admit Gabinius into the city, who was sent to receive the money that
he had promised.






CHAPTER 7.


     How Pompey Had The City Of Jerusalem Delivered Up To Him But
     Took The Temple By Force. How He Went Into The Holy Of
     Holies; As Also What Were His Other Exploits In Judea.

1. At this treatment Pompey was very angry, and took Aristobulus into
custody. And when he was come to the city, he looked about where he
might make his attack; for he saw the walls were so firm, that it would
be hard to overcome them; and that the valley before the walls was
terrible; and that the temple, which was within that valley, was itself
encompassed with a very strong wall, insomuch that if the city were
taken, that temple would be a second place of refuge for the enemy to
retire to.

2. Now as he was long in deliberating about this matter, a sedition
arose among the people within the city; Aristobulus's party being
willing to fight, and to set their king at liberty, while the party of
Hyrcanus were for opening the gates to Pompey; and the dread people were
in occasioned these last to be a very numerous party, when they looked
upon the excellent order the Roman soldiers were in. So Aristobulus's
party was worsted, and retired into the temple, and cut off the
communication between the temple and the city, by breaking down the
bridge that joined them together, and prepared to make an opposition to
the utmost; but as the others had received the Romans into the city, and
had delivered up the palace to him, Pompey sent Piso, one of his great
officers, into that palace with an army, who distributed a garrison
about the city, because he could not persuade any one of those that had
fled to the temple to come to terms of accommodation; he then disposed
all things that were round about them so as might favor their attacks,
as having Hyrcanus's party very ready to afford them both counsel and
assistance.

3. But Pompey himself filled up the ditch that was on the north side of
the temple, and the entire valley also, the army itself being obliged to
carry the materials for that purpose. And indeed it was a hard thing to
fill up that valley, by reason of its immense depth, especially as
the Jews used all the means possible to repel them from their superior
situation; nor had the Romans succeeded in their endeavors, had not
Pompey taken notice of the seventh days, on which the Jews abstain
from all sorts of work on a religious account, and raised his bank, but
restrained his soldiers from fighting on those days; for the Jews only
acted defensively on sabbath days. But as soon as Pompey had filled
up the valley, he erected high towers upon the bank, and brought those
engines which they had fetched from Tyre near to the wall, and tried
to batter it down; and the slingers of stones beat off those that stood
above them, and drove them away; but the towers on this side of the
city made very great resistance, and were indeed extraordinary both for
largeness and magnificence.

4. Now here it was that, upon the many hardships which the Romans
underwent, Pompey could not but admire not only at the other instances
of the Jews' fortitude, but especially that they did not at all intermit
their religious services, even when they were encompassed with darts
on all sides; for, as if the city were in full peace, their daily
sacrifices and purifications, and every branch of their religious
worship, was still performed to God with the utmost exactness. Nor
indeed when the temple was actually taken, and they were every day
slain about the altar, did they leave off the instances of their Divine
worship that were appointed by their law; for it was in the third
month of the siege before the Romans could even with great difficulty
overthrow one of the towers, and get into the temple. Now he that first
of all ventured to get over the wall, was Faustus Cornelius the son of
Sylla; and next after him were two centurions, Furius and Fabius; and
every one of these was followed by a cohort of his own, who encompassed
the Jews on all sides, and slew them, some of them as they were running
for shelter to the temple, and others as they, for a while, fought in
their own defense.

5. And now did many of the priests, even when they saw their enemies
assailing them with swords in their hands, without any disturbance, go
on with their Divine worship, and were slain while they were offering
their drink-offerings, and burning their incense, as preferring the
duties about their worship to God before their own preservation. The
greatest part of them were slain by their own countrymen, of the adverse
faction, and an innumerable multitude threw themselves down precipices;
nay, some there were who were so distracted among the insuperable
difficulties they were under, that they set fire to the buildings that
were near to the wall, and were burnt together with them. Now of the
Jews were slain twelve thousand; but of the Romans very few were slain,
but a greater number was wounded.

6. But there was nothing that affected the nation so much, in the
calamities they were then under, as that their holy place, which had
been hitherto seen by none, should be laid open to strangers; for
Pompey, and those that were about him, went into the temple itself 8
whither it was not lawful for any to enter but the high priest, and
saw what was reposited therein, the candlestick with its lamps, and the
table, and the pouring vessels, and the censers, all made entirely
of gold, as also a great quantity of spices heaped together, with two
thousand talents of sacred money. Yet did not he touch that money, nor
any thing else that was there reposited; but he commanded the ministers
about the temple, the very next day after he had taken it, to cleanse
it, and to perform their accustomed sacrifices. Moreover, he made
Hyrcanus high priest, as one that not only in other respects had showed
great alacrity, on his side, during the siege, but as he had been the
means of hindering the multitude that was in the country from fighting
for Aristobulus, which they were otherwise very ready to have done;
by which means he acted the part of a good general, and reconciled
the people to him more by benevolence than by terror. Now, among the
Captives, Aristobulus's father-in-law was taken, who was also his uncle:
so those that were the most guilty he punished with decollation; but
rewarded Faustus, and those with him that had fought so bravely,
with glorious presents, and laid a tribute upon the country, and upon
Jerusalem itself.

7. He also took away from the nation all those cities that they had
formerly taken, and that belonged to Celesyria, and made them subject to
him that was at that time appointed to be the Roman president there; and
reduced Judea within its proper bounds. He also rebuilt Gadara, 9 that
had been demolished by the Jews, in order to gratify one Demetrius,
who was of Gadara, and was one of his own freed-men. He also made other
cities free from their dominion, that lay in the midst of the country,
such, I mean, as they had not demolished before that time; Hippos, and
Scythopolis, as also Pella, and Samaria, and Marissa; and besides these
Ashdod, and Jamnia, and Arethusa; and in like manner dealt he with the
maritime cities, Gaza, and Joppa, and Dora, and that which was
anciently called Strato's Tower, but was afterward rebuilt with the
most magnificent edifices, and had its name changed to Cesarea, by king
Herod. All which he restored to their own citizens, and put them under
the province of Syria; which province, together with Judea, and the
countries as far as Egypt and Euphrates, he committed to Scaurus as
their governor, and gave him two legions to support him; while he made
all the haste he could himself to go through Cilicia, in his way
to Rome, having Aristobulus and his children along with him as his
captives. They were two daughters and two sons; the one of which sons,
Alexander, ran away as he was going; but the younger, Antigonus, with
his sisters, were carried to Rome.






CHAPTER 8.


     Alexander, The Son Of Aristobulus, Who Ran Away From Pompey,
     Makes An Expedition Against Hyrcanus; But Being Overcome By
     Gabinius He Delivers Up The Fortresses To Him. After This
     Aristobulus Escapes From Rome And Gathers An Army Together;
     But Being Beaten By The Romans, He Is Brought Back To Rome;
     With Other Things Relating To Gabinius, Crassus And Cassius.

1. In the mean time, Scaurus made an expedition into Arabia, but was
stopped by the difficulty of the places about Petra. However, he laid
waste the country about Pella, though even there he was under great
hardship; for his army was afflicted with famine. In order to supply
which want, Hyrcanus afforded him some assistance, and sent him
provisions by the means of Antipater; whom also Scaurus sent to Aretas,
as one well acquainted with him, to induce him to pay him money to buy
his peace. The king of Arabia complied with the proposal, and gave him
three hundred talents; upon which Scaurus drew his army out of Arabia 10

2. But as for Alexander, that son of Aristobulus who ran away from
Pompey, in some time he got a considerable band of men together, and lay
heavy upon Hyrcanus, and overran Judea, and was likely to overturn
him quickly; and indeed he had come to Jerusalem, and had ventured to
rebuild its wall that was thrown down by Pompey, had not Gabinius, who
was sent as successor to Scaurus into Syria, showed his bravery, as in
many other points, so in making an expedition against Alexander; who, as
he was afraid that he would attack him, so he got together a large army,
composed of ten thousand armed footmen, and fifteen hundred horsemen.
He also built walls about proper places; Alexandrium, and Hyrcanium, and
Machaerus, that lay upon the mountains of Arabia.

3. However, Gabinius sent before him Marcus Antonius, and followed
himself with his whole army; but for the select body of soldiers that
were about Antipater, and another body of Jews under the command of
Malichus and Pitholaus, these joined themselves to those captains
that were about Marcus Antonius, and met Alexander; to which body came
Gabinius with his main army soon afterward; and as Alexander was not
able to sustain the charge of the enemies' forces, now they were joined,
he retired. But when he was come near to Jerusalem, he was forced to
fight, and lost six thousand men in the battle; three thousand of which
fell down dead, and three thousand were taken alive; so he fled with the
remainder to Alexandrium.

4. Now when Gabinius was come to Alexandrium, because he found a great
many there en-camped, he tried, by promising them pardon for their
former offenses, to induce them to come over to him before it came to a
fight; but when they would hearken to no terms of accommodation, he
slew a great number of them, and shut up a great number of them in the
citadel. Now Marcus Antonius, their leader, signalized himself in this
battle, who, as he always showed great courage, so did he never show it
so much as now; but Gabinius, leaving forces to take the citadel, went
away himself, and settled the cities that had not been demolished,
and rebuilt those that had been destroyed. Accordingly, upon his
injunctions, the following cities were restored: Scythopolis, and
Samaria, and Anthedon, and Apollonia, and Jamnia, and Raphia, and
Mariassa, and Adoreus, and Gamala, and Ashdod, and many others; while
a great number of men readily ran to each of them, and became their
inhabitants.

5. When Gabinius had taken care of these cities, he returned to
Alexandrium, and pressed on the siege. So when Alexander despaired of
ever obtaining the government, he sent ambassadors to him, and prayed
him to forgive what he had offended him in, and gave up to him the
remaining fortresses, Hyrcanium and Machaerus, as he put Alexandrium
into his hands afterwards; all which Gabinius demolished, at the
persuasion of Alexander's mother, that they might not be receptacles of
men in a second war. She was now there in order to mollify Gabinius, out
of her concern for her relations that were captives at Rome, which were
her husband and her other children. After this Gabinius brought Hyrcanus
to Jerusalem, and committed the care of the temple to him; but ordained
the other political government to be by an aristocracy. He also parted
the whole nation into five conventions, assigning one portion to
Jerusalem, another to Gadara, that another should belong to Amathus, a
fourth to Jericho, and to the fifth division was allotted Sepphoris,
a city of Galilee. So the people were glad to be thus freed from
monarchical government, and were governed for the future by all
aristocracy.

6. Yet did Aristobulus afford another foundation for new disturbances.
He fled away from Rome, and got together again many of the Jews that
were desirous of a change, such as had borne an affection to him of old;
and when he had taken Alexandrium in the first place, he attempted to
build a wall about it; but as soon as Gabinius had sent an army against
him under Siscuria, and Antonius, and Servilius, he was aware of it,
and retreated to Machaerus. And as for the unprofitable multitude, he
dismissed them, and only marched on with those that were armed, being to
the number of eight thousand, among whom was Pitholaus, who had been the
lieutenant at Jerusalem, but deserted to Aristobulus with a thousand
of his men; so the Romans followed him, and when it came to a battle,
Aristobulus's party for a long time fought courageously; but at length
they were overborne by the Romans, and of them five thousand fell down
dead, and about two thousand fled to a certain little hill, but the
thousand that remained with Aristobulus brake through the Roman army,
and marched together to Machaerus; and when the king had lodged the
first night upon its ruins, he was in hopes of raising another army, if
the war would but cease a while; accordingly, he fortified that strong
hold, though it was done after a poor manner. But the Romans falling
upon him, he resisted, even beyond his abilities, for two days, and then
was taken, and brought a prisoner to Gabinius, with Antigonus his son,
who had fled away together with him from Rome; and from Gabinius he was
carried to Rome again. Wherefore the senate put him under confinement,
but returned his children back to Judea, because Gabinius informed them
by letters that he had promised Aristobulus's mother to do so, for her
delivering the fortresses up to him.

7. But now as Gabinius was marching to the war against the Parthians,
he was hindered by Ptolemy, whom, upon his return from Euphrates, he
brought back into Egypt, making use of Hyrcanus and Antipater to provide
every thing that was necessary for this expedition; for Antipater
furnished him with money, and weapons, and corn, and auxiliaries; he
also prevailed with the Jews that were there, and guarded the avenues at
Pelusium, to let them pass. But now, upon Gabinius's absence, the other
part of Syria was in motion, and Alexander, the son of Aristobulus,
brought the Jews to revolt again. Accordingly, he got together a very
great army, and set about killing all the Romans that were in the
country; hereupon Gabinius was afraid, [for he was come back already out
of Egypt, and obliged to come back quickly by these tumults,] and
sent Antipater, who prevailed with some of the revolters to be quiet.
However, thirty thousand still continued with Alexander, who was himself
eager to fight also; accordingly, Gabinius went out to fight, when
the Jews met him; and as the battle was fought near Mount Tabor, ten
thousand of them were slain, and the rest of the multitude dispersed
themselves, and fled away. So Gabinius came to Jerusalem, and settled
the government as Antipater would have it; thence he marched, and fought
and beat the Nabateans: as for Mithridates and Orsanes, who fled out of
Parthin, he sent them away privately, but gave it out among the soldiers
that they had run away.

8. In the mean time, Crassus came as successor to Gabinius in Syria. He
took away all the rest of the gold belonging to the temple of Jerusalem,
in order to furnish himself for his expedition against the Parthians.
He also took away the two thousand talents which Pompey had not touched;
but when he had passed over Euphrates, he perished himself, and his army
with him; concerning which affairs this is not a proper time to speak
[more largely].

9. But now Cassius, after Crassus, put a stop to the Parthians, who were
marching in order to enter Syria. Cassius had fled into that province,
and when he had taken possession of the same, he made a hasty march into
Judea; and, upon his taking Taricheae, he carried thirty thousand Jews
into slavery. He also slew Pitholaus, who had supported the seditious
followers of Aristobulus; and it was Antipater who advised him so to
do. Now this Antipater married a wife of an eminent family among the
Arabisus, whose name was Cypros, and had four sons born to him by her,
Phasaelus and Herod, who was afterwards king, and, besides these, Joseph
and Pheroras; and he had a daughter whose name was Salome. Now as he
made himself friends among the men of power every where, by the kind
offices he did them, and the hospitable manner that he treated them;
so did he contract the greatest friendship with the king of Arabia, by
marrying his relation; insomuch that when he made war with Aristobulus,
he sent and intrusted his children with him. So when Cassius had forced
Alexander to come to terms and to be quiet, he returned to Euphrates,
in order to prevent the Parthians from repassing it; concerning which
matter we shall speak elsewhere. 11






CHAPTER 9.


     Aristobulus Is Taken Off By Pompey's Friends, As Is His Son
     Alexander By Scipio. Antipater Cultivates A Friendship With
     Caesar, After Pompey's Death; He Also Performs Great Actions
     In That War, Wherein He Assisted Mithridates.

1. Now, upon the flight of Pompey and of the senate beyond the Ionian
Sea, Caesar got Rome and the empire under his power, and released
Aristobulus from his bonds. He also committed two legions to him, and
sent him in haste into Syria, as hoping that by his means he should
easily conquer that country, and the parts adjoining to Judea. But envy
prevented any effect of Aristobulus's alacrity, and the hopes of Caesar;
for he was taken off by poison given him by those of Pompey's party;
and, for a long while, he had not so much as a burial vouchsafed him
in his own country; but his dead body lay [above ground], preserved in
honey, until it was sent to the Jews by Antony, in order to be buried in
the royal sepulchers.

2. His son Alexander also was beheaded by Scipio at Antioch, and that
by the command of Pompey, and upon an accusation laid against him before
his tribunal, for the mischiefs he had done to the Romans. But Ptolemy,
the son of Menneus, who was then ruler of Chalcis, under Libanus, took
his brethren to him by sending his son Philippio for them to Ascalon,
who took Antigonus, as well as his sisters, away from Aristobulus's
wife, and brought them to his father; and falling in love with the
younger daughter, he married her, and was afterwards slain by his father
on her account; for Ptolemy himself, after he had slain his son, married
her, whose name was Alexandra; on the account of which marriage he took
the greater care of her brother and sister.

3. Now, after Pompey was dead, Antipater changed sides, and cultivated
a friendship with Caesar. And since Mithridates of Pergamus, with
the forces he led against Egypt, was excluded from the avenues about
Pelusium, and was forced to stay at Asealon, he persuaded the Arabians,
among whom he had lived, to assist him, and came himself to him, at the
head of three thousand armed men. He also encouraged the men of power in
Syria to come to his assistance, as also of the inhabitants of Libanus,
Ptolemy, and Jamblicus, and another Ptolemy; by which means the cities
of that country came readily into this war; insomuch that Mithridates
ventured now, in dependence upon the additional strength that he had
gotten by Antipater, to march forward to Pelusium; and when they refused
him a passage through it, he besieged the city; in the attack of which
place Antipater principally signalized himself, for he brought down that
part of the wall which was over against him, and leaped first of all
into the city, with the men that were about him.

4. Thus was Pelusium taken. But still, as they were marching on, those
Egyptian Jews that inhabited the country called the country of Onias
stopped them. Then did Antipater not only persuade them not to stop
them, but to afford provisions for their army; on which account even
the people about Memphis would not fight against them, but of their
own accord joined Mithridates. Whereupon he went round about Delta, and
fought the rest of the Egyptians at a place called the Jews' Camp; nay,
when he was in danger in the battle with all his right wing, Antipater
wheeled about, and came along the bank of the river to him; for he
had beaten those that opposed him as he led the left wing. After which
success he fell upon those that pursued Mithridates, and slew a great
many of them, and pursued the remainder so far that he took their camp,
while he lost no more than fourscore of his own men; as Mithridates
lost, during the pursuit that was made after him, about eight hundred.
He was also himself saved unexpectedly, and became an unreproachable
witness to Caesar of the great actions of Antipater.

5. Whereupon Caesar encouraged Antipater to undertake other hazardous
enterprises for him, and that by giving him great commendations and
hopes of reward. In all which enterprises he readily exposed himself to
many dangers, and became a most courageous warrior; and had many wounds
almost all over his body, as demonstrations of his valor. And when
Caesar had settled the affairs of Egypt, and was returning into Syria
again, he gave him the privilege of a Roman citizen, and freedom from
taxes, and rendered him an object of admiration by the honors and marks
of friendship he bestowed upon him. On this account it was that he also
confirmed Hyrcanus in the high priesthood.






CHAPTER 10.


     Caesar Makes Antipater Procurator Of Judea; As Does
     Antipater Appoint Phasaelus To Be Governor Of Jerusalem, And
     Herod Governor Of Galilee; Who, In Some Time, Was Called To
     Answer For Himself [Before The Sanhedrim], Where He Is
     Acquitted. Sextus Caesar Is Treacherously Killed By Bassus
     And Is Succeeded By Marcus.

1. About this time it was that Antigonus, the son of Aristobulus,
came to Caesar, and became, in a surprising manner, the occasion of
Antipater's further advancement; for whereas he ought to have lamented
that his father appeared to have been poisoned on account of his
quarrels with Pompey, and to have complained of Scipio's barbarity
towards his brother, and not to mix any invidious passion when he
was suing for mercy; besides those things, he came before Caesar, and
accused Hyrcanus and Antipater, how they had driven him and his brethren
entirely out of their native country, and had acted in a great many
instances unjustly and extravagantly with relation to their nation; and
that as to the assistance they had sent him into Egypt, it was not done
out of good-will to him, but out of the fear they were in from former
quarrels, and in order to gain pardon for their friendship to [his
enemy] Pompey.

2. Hereupon Antipater threw away his garments, and showed the multitude
of the wounds he had, and said, that as to his good-will to Caesar, he
had no occasion to say a word, because his body cried aloud, though he
said nothing himself; that he wondered at Antigonus's boldness, while
he was himself no other than the son of an enemy to the Romans, and of
a fugitive, and had it by inheritance from his father to be fond of
innovations and seditions, that he should undertake to accuse other
men before the Roman governor, and endeavor to gain some advantages to
himself, when he ought to be contented that he was suffered to live;
for that the reason of his desire of governing public affairs was not so
much because he was in want of it, but because, if he could once obtain
the same, he might stir up a sedition among the Jews, and use what he
should gain from the Romans to the disservice of those that gave it him.

3. When Caesar heard this, he declared Hyrcanus to be the most worthy
of the high priesthood, and gave leave to Antipater to choose what
authority he pleased; but he left the determination of such dignity to
him that bestowed the dignity upon him; so he was constituted procurator
of all Judea, and obtained leave, moreover, to rebuild 12 those walls of
his country that had been thrown down. These honorary grants Caesar sent
orders to have engraved in the Capitol, that they might stand there as
indications of his own justice, and of the virtue of Antipater.

4. But as soon as Antipater had conducted Caesar out of Syria he
returned to Judea, and the first thing he did was to rebuild that wall
of his own country [Jerusalem] which Pompey had overthrown, and then to
go over the country, and to quiet the tumults that were therein; where
he partly threatened, and partly advised, every one, and told them
that in case they would submit to Hyrcanus, they would live happily and
peaceably, and enjoy what they possessed, and that with universal peace
and quietness; but that in case they hearkened to such as had some
frigid hopes by raising new troubles to get themselves some gain, they
should then find him to be their lord instead of their procurator; and
find Hyrcanus to be a tyrant instead of a king; and both the Romans and
Caesar to be their enemies, instead of rulers; for that they would not
suffer him to be removed from the government, whom they had made their
governor. And, at the same time that he said this, he settled the
affairs of the country by himself, because he saw that Hyrcanus was
inactive, and not fit to manage the affairs of the kingdom. So he
constituted his eldest son, Phasaelus, governor of Jerusalem, and of the
parts about it; he also sent his next son, Herod, who was very young, 13
with equal authority into Galilee.

5. Now Herod was an active man, and soon found proper materials for his
active spirit to work upon. As therefore he found that Hezekias, the
head of the robbers, ran over the neighboring parts of Syria with a
great band of men, he caught him and slew him, and many more of the
robbers with him; which exploit was chiefly grateful to the Syrians,
insomuch that hymns were sung in Herod's commendation, both in the
villages and in the cities, as having procured their quietness, and
having preserved what they possessed to them; on which occasion he
became acquainted with Sextus Caesar, a kinsman of the great Caesar,
and president of Syria. A just emulation of his glorious actions excited
Phasaelus also to imitate him. Accordingly, he procured the good-will of
the inhabitants of Jerusalem, by his own management of the city affairs,
and did not abuse his power in any disagreeable manner; whence it came
to pass that the nation paid Antipater the respects that were due only
to a king, and the honors they all yielded him were equal to the honors
due to an absolute lord; yet did he not abate any part of that good-will
or fidelity which he owed to Hyrcanus.

6. However, he found it impossible to escape envy in such his
prosperity; for the glory of these young men affected even Hyrcanus
himself already privately, though he said nothing of it to any body; but
what he principally was grieved at was the great actions of Herod, and
that so many messengers came one before another, and informed him of the
great reputation he got in all his undertakings. There were also many
people in the royal palace itself who inflamed his envy at him; those, I
mean, who were obstructed in their designs by the prudence either of
the young men, or of Antipater. These men said, that by committing the
public affairs to the management of Antipater and of his sons, he
sat down with nothing but the bare name of a king, without any of its
authority; and they asked him how long he would so far mistake himself,
as to breed up kings against his own interest; for that they did not now
conceal their government of affairs any longer, but were plainly lords
of the nation, and had thrust him out of his authority; that this was
the case when Herod slew so many men without his giving him any command
to do it, either by word of mouth, or by his letter, and this in
contradiction to the law of the Jews; who therefore, in case he be not a
king, but a private man, still ought to come to his trial, and answer it
to him, and to the laws of his country, which do not permit any one to
be killed till he hath been condemned in judgment.

7. Now Hyrcanus was, by degrees, inflamed with these discourses, and at
length could bear no longer, but he summoned Herod to take his trial.
Accordingly, by his father's advice, and as soon as the affairs of
Galilee would give him leave, he came up to [Jerusalem], when he had
first placed garrisons in Galilee; however, he came with a sufficient
body of soldiers, so many indeed that he might not appear to have with
him an army able to overthrow Hyrcanus's government, nor yet so few as
to expose him to the insults of those that envied him. However, Sextus
Caesar was in fear for the young man, lest he should be taken by
his enemies, and brought to punishment; so he sent some to denounce
expressly to Hyrcanus that he should acquit Herod of the capital charge
against him; who acquitted him accordingly, as being otherwise inclined
also so to do, for he loved Herod.

8. But Herod, supposing that he had escaped punishment without the
consent of the king, retired to Sextus, to Damascus, and got every thing
ready, in order not to obey him if he should summon him again; whereupon
those that were evil-disposed irritated Hyrcanus, and told him that
Herod was gone away in anger, and was prepared to make war upon him; and
as the king believed what they said, he knew not what to do, since he
saw his antagonist was stronger than he was himself. And now, since
Herod was made general of Coelesyria and Samaria by Sextus Caesar, he
was formidable, not only from the good-will which the nation bore him,
but by the power he himself had; insomuch that Hyrcanus fell into the
utmost degree of terror, and expected he would presently march against
him with his army.

9. Nor was he mistaken in the conjecture he made; for Herod got his army
together, out of the anger he bare him for his threatening him with the
accusation in a public court, and led it to Jerusalem, in order to throw
Hyrcanus down from his kingdom; and this he had soon done, unless his
father and brother had gone out together and broken the force of his
fury, and this by exhorting him to carry his revenge no further than to
threatening and affrighting, but to spare the king, under whom he had
been advanced to such a degree of power; and that he ought not to be so
much provoked at his being tried, as to forget to be thankful that
he was acquitted; nor so long to think upon what was of a melancholy
nature, as to be ungrateful for his deliverance; and if we ought to
reckon that God is the arbitrator of success in war, an unjust cause
is of more disadvantage than an army can be of advantage; and that
therefore he ought not to be entirely confident of success in a case
where he is to fight against his king, his supporter, and one that had
often been his benefactor, and that had never been severe to him, any
otherwise than as he had hearkened to evil counselors, and this no
further than by bringing a shadow of injustice upon him. So Herod was
prevailed upon by these arguments, and supposed that what he had already
done was sufficient for his future hopes, and that he had enough shown
his power to the nation.

10. In the mean time, there was a disturbance among the Romans about
Apamia, and a civil war occasioned by the treacherous slaughter of
Sextus Caesar, by Cecilius Bassus, which he perpetrated out of his
good-will to Pompey; he also took the authority over his forces; but as
the rest of Caesar's commanders attacked Bassus with their whole army,
in order to punish him for the murder of Caesar, Antipater also sent
them assistance by his sons, both on account of him that was murdered,
and on account of that Caesar who was still alive, both of which were
their friends; and as this war grew to be of a considerable length,
Marcus came out of Italy as successor to Sextus.






CHAPTER 11.


     Herod Is Made Procurator Of All Syria; Malichus Is Afraid Of
     Him, And Takes Antipater Off By Poison; Whereupon The
     Tribunes Of The Soldiers Are Prevailed With To Kill Him.

1. There, was at this time a mighty war raised among the Romans upon the
sudden and treacherous slaughter of Caesar by Cassius and Brutus, after
he had held the government for three years and seven months. 14 Upon
this murder there were very great agitations, and the great men were
mightily at difference one with another, and every one betook himself to
that party where they had the greatest hopes of their own, of advancing
themselves. Accordingly, Cassius came into Syria, in order to receive
the forces that were at Apamia, where he procured a reconciliation
between Bassus and Marcus, and the legions which were at difference with
him; so he raised the siege of Apamia, and took upon him the command of
the army, and went about exacting tribute of the cities, and demanding
their money to such a degree as they were not able to bear.

2. So he gave command that the Jews should bring in seven hundred
talents; whereupon Antipater, out of his dread of Cassius's threats,
parted the raising of this sum among his sons, and among others of his
acquaintance, and to be done immediately; and among them he required
one Malichus, who was at enmity with him, to do his part also, which
necessity forced him to do. Now Herod, in the first place, mitigated the
passion of Cassius, by bringing his share out of Galilee, which was a
hundred talents, on which account he was in the highest favor with him;
and when he reproached the rest for being tardy, he was angry at the
cities themselves; so he made slaves of Gophna and Emmaus, and two
others of less note; nay, he proceeded as if he would kill Malichus,
because he had not made greater haste in exacting his tribute; but
Antipater prevented the ruin of this man, and of the other cities, and
got into Cassius's favor by bringing in a hundred talents immediately.
15

3. However, when Cassius was gone Malichus forgot the kindness that
Antipater had done him, and laid frequent plots against him that
had saved him, as making haste to get him out of the way, who was an
obstacle to his wicked practices; but Antipater was so much afraid of
the power and cunning of the man, that he went beyond Jordan, in order
to get an army to guard himself against his treacherous designs; but
when Malichus was caught in his plot, he put upon Antipater's sons by
his impudence, for he thoroughly deluded Phasaelus, who was the guardian
of Jerusalem, and Herod who was intrusted with the weapons of war, and
this by a great many excuses and oaths, and persuaded them to procure
his reconciliation to his father. Thus was he preserved again by
Antipater, who dissuaded Marcus, the then president of Syria, from
his resolution of killing Malichus, on account of his attempts for
innovation.

4. Upon the war between Cassius and Brutus on one side, against the
younger Caesar [Augustus] and Antony on the other, Cassius and Marcus
got together an army out of Syria; and because Herod was likely to have
a great share in providing necessaries, they then made him procurator of
all Syria, and gave him an army of foot and horse. Cassius promised him
also, that after the war was over, he would make him king of Judea. But
it so happened that the power and hopes of his son became the cause of
his perdition; for as Malichus was afraid of this, he corrupted one
of the king's cup-bearers with money to give a poisoned potion to
Antipater; so he became a sacrifice to Malichus's wickedness, and died
at a feast. He was a man in other respects active in the management
of affairs, and one that recovered the government to Hyrcanus, and
preserved it in his hands.

5. However, Malichus, when he was suspected of poisoning Antipater, and
when the multitude was angry with him for it, denied it, and made the
people believe he was not guilty. He also prepared to make a greater
figure, and raised soldiers; for he did not suppose that Herod would
be quiet, who indeed came upon him with an army presently, in order to
revenge his father's death; but, upon hearing the advice of his brother
Phasaelus, not to punish him in an open manner, lest the multitude
should fall into a sedition, he admitted of Malichus's apology, and
professed that he cleared him of that suspicion; he also made a pompous
funeral for his father.

6. So Herod went to Samaria, which was then in a tumult, and settled the
city in peace; after which at the [Pentecost] festival, he returned
to Jerusalem, having his armed men with him: hereupon Hyrcanus, at the
request of Malichus, who feared his reproach, forbade them to introduce
foreigners to mix themselves with the people of the country while they
were purifying themselves; but Herod despised the pretense, and him that
gave that command, and came in by night. Upon which Malithus came to
him, and bewailed Antipater; Herod also made him believe [he admitted
of his lamentations as real], although he had much ado to restrain his
passion at him; however, he did himself bewail the murder of his father
in his letters to Cassius, who, on other accounts, also hated Malichus.
Cassius sent him word back that he should avenge his father's death upon
him, and privately gave order to the tribunes that were under him, that
they should assist Herod in a righteous action he was about.

7. And because, upon the taking of Laodicea by Cassius, the men of power
were gotten together from all quarters, with presents and crowns in
their hands, Herod allotted this time for the punishment of Malichus.
When Malichus suspected that, and was at Tyre, he resolved to withdraw
his son privately from among the Tyrians, who was a hostage there, while
he got ready to fly away into Judea; the despair he was in of escaping
excited him to think of greater things; for he hoped that he should
raise the nation to a revolt from the Romans, while Cassius was busy
about the war against Antony, and that he should easily depose Hyrcanus,
and get the crown for himself.

8. But fate laughed at the hopes he had; for Herod foresaw what he
was so zealous about, and invited both Hyrcanus and him to supper; but
calling one of the principal servants that stood by him to him, he
sent him out, as though it were to get things ready for supper, but in
reality to give notice beforehand about the plot that was laid against
him; accordingly they called to mind what orders Cassius had given
them, and went out of the city with their swords in their hands upon the
sea-shore, where they encompassed Malichus round about, and killed him
with many wounds. Upon which Hyrcanus was immediately affrighted, till
he swooned away and fell down at the surprise he was in; and it was
with difficulty that he was recovered, when he asked who it was that had
killed Malichus. And when one of the tribunes replied that it was done
by the command of Cassius, "Then," said he, "Cassius hath saved both me
and my country, by cutting off one that was laying plots against them
both." Whether he spake according to his own sentiments, or whether his
fear was such that he was obliged to commend the action by saying so,
is uncertain; however, by this method Herod inflicted punishment upon
Malichus.






CHAPTER 12.


     Phasaelus Is Too Hard For Felix; Herod Also Overcomes
     Antigonus In Rattle; And The Jews Accuse Both Herod And
     Phasaelus But Antonius Acquits Them, And Makes Them
     Tetrarchs.

1. When Cassius was gone out of Syria, another sedition arose at
Jerusalem, wherein Felix assaulted Phasaelus with an army, that he might
revenge the death of Malichus upon Herod, by falling upon his brother.
Now Herod happened then to be with Fabius, the governor of Damascus,
and as he was going to his brother's assistance, he was detained by
sickness; in the mean time, Phasaelus was by himself too hard for Felix,
and reproached Hyrcanus on account of his ingratitude, both for what
assistance he had afforded Malichus, and for overlooking Malichus's
brother, when he possessed himself of the fortresses; for he had gotten
a great many of them already, and among them the strongest of them all,
Masada.

2. However, nothing could be sufficient for him against the force of
Herod, who, as soon as he was recovered, took the other fortresses
again, and drove him out of Masada in the posture of a supplicant; he
also drove away Marion, the tyrant of the Tyrians, out of Galilee, when
he had already possessed himself of three fortified places; but as to
those Tyrians whom he had caught, he preserved them all alive; nay, some
of them he gave presents to, and so sent them away, and thereby procured
good-will to himself from the city, and hatred to the tyrant. Marion had
indeed obtained that tyrannical power of Cassius, who set tyrants
over all Syria 16 and out of hatred to Herod it was that he assisted
Antigonus, the son of Aristobulus, and principally on Fabius's account,
whom Antigonus had made his assistant by money, and had him accordingly
on his side when he made his descent; but it was Ptolemy, the kinsman of
Antigonus, that supplied all that he wanted.

3. When Herod had fought against these in the avenues of Judea, he
was conqueror in the battle, and drove away Antigonus, and returned to
Jerusalem, beloved by every body for the glorious action he had done;
for those who did not before favor him did join themselves to him now,
because of his marriage into the family of Hyrcanus; for as he had
formerly married a wife out of his own country of no ignoble blood,
who was called Doris, of whom he begat Antipater; so did he now marry
Mariamne, the daughter of Alexander, the son of Aristobulus, and the
granddaughter of Hyrcanus, and was become thereby a relation of the
king.

4. But when Caesar and Antony had slain Cassius near Philippi, and
Caesar was gone to Italy, and Antony to Asia, amongst the rest of the
cities which sent ambassadors to Antony unto Bithynia, the great men of
the Jews came also, and accused Phasaelus and Herod, that they kept the
government by force, and that Hyrcanus had no more than an honorable
name. Herod appeared ready to answer this accusation; and having made
Antony his friend by the large sums of money which he gave him, he
brought him to such a temper as not to hear the others speak against
him; and thus did they part at this time.

5. However, after this, there came a hundred of the principal men among
the Jews to Daphne by Antioch to Antony, who was already in love with
Cleopatra to the degree of slavery; these Jews put those men that were
the most potent, both in dignity and eloquence, foremost, and accused
the brethren. 17 But Messala opposed them, and defended the brethren,
and that while Hyrcanus stood by him, on account of his relation to
them. When Antony had heard both sides, he asked Hyrcanus which party
was the fittest to govern, who replied that Herod and his party were
the fittest. Antony was glad of that answer, for he had been formerly
treated in an hospitable and obliging manner by his father Antipater,
when he marched into Judea with Gabinius; so he constituted the brethren
tetrarchs, and committed to them the government of Judea.

6. But when the ambassadors had indignation at this procedure, Antony
took fifteen of them, and put them into custody, whom he was also going
to kill presently, and the rest he drove away with disgrace; on which
occasion a still greater tumult arose at Jerusalem; so they sent again a
thousand ambassadors to Tyre, where Antony now abode, as he was marching
to Jerusalem; upon these men who made a clamor he sent out the governor
of Tyre, and ordered him to punish all that he could catch of them, and
to settle those in the administration whom he had made tetrarchs.

7. But before this, Herod and Hyrcanus went out upon the sea-shore, and
earnestly desired of these ambassadors that they would neither bring
ruin upon themselves, nor war upon their native country, by their rash
contentions; and when they grew still more outrageous, Antony sent out
armed men, and slew a great many, and wounded more of them; of whom
those that were slain were buried by Hyrcanus, as were the wounded
put under the care of physicians by him; yet would not those that
had escaped be quiet still, but put the affairs of the city into such
disorder, and so provoked Antony, that he slew those whom he had in
bonds also.






CHAPTER 13.


     The Parthians Bring Antigonus Back Into Judea, And Cast
     Hyrcanus And Phasaelus Into Prison. The Flight Of Herod, And
     The Taking Of Jerusalem And What Hyrcanus And Phasaelus
     Suffered.

1. Now two years afterward, when Barzapharnes, a governor among the
Parthians, and Paeorus, the king's son, had possessed themselves of
Syria, and when Lysanias had already succeeded upon the death of his
father Ptolemy, the son of Menneus, in the government [of Chalcis], he
prevailed with the governor, by a promise of a thousand talents, and
five hundred women, to bring back Antigonus to his kingdom, and to turn
Hyrcanus out of it. Pacorus was by these means induced so to do, and
marched along the sea-coast, while he ordered Barzapharnes to fall upon
the Jews as he went along the Mediterranean part of the country; but
of the maritime people, the Tyrians would not receive Pacorus, although
those of Ptolemais and Sidon had received him; so he committed a troop
of his horse to a certain cup-bearer belonging to the royal family,
of his own name [Pacorus], and gave him orders to march into Judea, in
order to learn the state of affairs among their enemies, and to help
Antigonus when he should want his assistance.

2. Now as these men were ravaging Carmel, many of the Jews ran together
to Antigonus, and showed themselves ready to make an incursion into
the country; so he sent them before into that place called Drymus, [the
woodland 18 ] to seize upon the place; whereupon a battle was fought
between them, and they drove the enemy away, and pursued them, and ran
after them as far as Jerusalem, and as their numbers increased, they
proceeded as far as the king's palace; but as Hyrcanus and Phasaelus
received them with a strong body of men, there happened a battle in the
market-place, in which Herod's party beat the enemy, and shut them up
in the temple, and set sixty men in the houses adjoining as a guard to
them. But the people that were tumultuous against the brethren came in,
and burnt those men; while Herod, in his rage for killing them, attacked
and slew many of the people, till one party made incursions on the other
by turns, day by day, in the way of ambushes, and slaughters were made
continually among them.

3. Now when that festival which we call Pentecost was at hand, all the
places about the temple, and the whole city, was full of a multitude of
people that were come out of the country, and which were the greatest
part of them armed also, at which time Phasaelus guarded the wall, and
Herod, with a few, guarded the royal palace; and when he made an assault
upon his enemies, as they were out of their ranks, on the north quarter
of the city, he slew a very great number of them, and put them all to
flight; and some of them he shut up within the city, and others within
the outward rampart. In the mean time, Antigonus desired that Pacorus
might be admitted to be a reconciler between them; and Phasaelus was
prevailed upon to admit the Parthian into the city with five hundred
horse, and to treat him in an hospitable manner, who pretended that he
came to quell the tumult, but in reality he came to assist Antigonus;
however, he laid a plot for Phasaelus, and persuaded him to go as an
ambassador to Barzapharnes, in order to put an end to the war, although
Herod was very earnest with him to the contrary, and exhorted him to
kill the plotter, but not expose himself to the snares he had laid for
him, because the barbarians are naturally perfidious. However,
Pacorus went out and took Hyrcanus with him, that he might be the less
suspected; he also 19 left some of the horsemen, called the Freemen,
with Herod, and conducted Phasaelus with the rest.

4. But now, when they were come to Galilee, they found that the people
of that country had revolted, and were in arms, who came very cunningly
to their leader, and besought him to conceal his treacherous intentions
by an obliging behavior to them; accordingly, he at first made them
presents; and afterward, as they went away, laid ambushes for them; and
when they were come to one of the maritime cities called Ecdippon, they
perceived that a plot was laid for them; for they were there informed
of the promise of a thousand talents, and how Antigonus had devoted the
greatest number of the women that were there with them, among the five
hundred, to the Parthians; they also perceived that an ambush was always
laid for them by the barbarians in the night time; they had also been
seized on before this, unless they had waited for the seizure of Herod
first at Jerusalem, because if he were once informed of this treachery
of theirs, he would take care of himself; nor was this a mere report,
but they saw the guards already not far off them.

5. Nor would Phasaelus think of forsaking Hyrcanus and flying away,
although Ophellius earnestly persuaded him to it; for this man had
learned the whole scheme of the plot from Saramalla, the richest of
all the Syrians. But Phasaelus went up to the Parfilian governor, and
reproached him to his face for laying this treacherous plot against
them, and chiefly because he had done it for money; and he promised him
that he would give him more money for their preservation, than Antigonus
had promised to give for the kingdom. But the sly Parthian endeavored to
remove all this suspicion by apologies and by oaths, and then went [to
the other] Pacorus; immediately after which those Parthians who were
left, and had it in charge, seized upon Phasaelus and Hyrcanus, who
could do no more than curse their perfidiousness and their perjury.

6. In the mean time, the cup-bearer was sent [back], and laid a plot how
to seize upon Herod, by deluding him, and getting him out of the city,
as he was commanded to do. But Herod suspected the barbarians from the
beginning; and having then received intelligence that a messenger,
who was to bring him the letters that informed him of the treachery
intended, had fallen among the enemy, he would not go out of the city;
though Pacorus said very positively that he ought to go out, and meet
the messengers that brought the letters, for that the enemy had not
taken them, and that the contents of them were not accounts of any plots
upon them, but of what Phasaelus had done; yet had he heard from others
that his brother was seized; and Alexandra 20 the shrewdest woman in the
world, Hyrcanus's daughter, begged of him that he would not go out, nor
trust himself to those barbarians, who now were come to make an attempt
upon him openly.

7. Now as Pacorus and his friends were considering how they might bring
their plot to bear privately, because it was not possible to circumvent
a man of so great prudence by openly attacking him, Herod prevented
them, and went off with the persons that were the most nearly related to
him by night, and this without their enemies being apprized of it. But
as soon as the Parthians perceived it, they pursued after them; and as
he gave orders for his mother, and sister, and the young woman who was
betrothed to him, with her mother, and his youngest brother, to make the
best of their way, he himself, with his servants, took all the care they
could to keep off the barbarians; and when at every assault he had slain
a great many of them, he came to the strong hold of Masada.

8. Nay, he found by experience that the Jews fell more heavily upon him
than did the Parthians, and created him troubles perpetually, and this
ever since he was gotten sixty furlongs from the city; these sometimes
brought it to a sort of a regular battle. Now in the place where Herod
beat them, and killed a great number of them, there he afterward built
a citadel, in memory of the great actions he did there, and adorned it
with the most costly palaces, and erected very strong fortifications,
and called it, from his own name, Herodium. Now as they were in their
flight, many joined themselves to him every day; and at a place called
Thressa of Idumea his brother Joseph met him, and advised him to ease
himself of a great number of his followers, because Masada would not
contain so great a multitude, which were above nine thousand. Herod
complied with this advice, and sent away the most cumbersome part of his
retinue, that they might go into Idumea, and gave them provisions
for their journey; but he got safe to the fortress with his nearest
relations, and retained with him only the stoutest of his followers; and
there it was that he left eight hundred of his men as a guard for the
women, and provisions sufficient for a siege; but he made haste himself
to Petra of Arabia.

9. As for the Parthians in Jerusalem, they betook themselves to
plundering, and fell upon the houses of those that were fled, and upon
the king's palace, and spared nothing but Hyrcanus's money, which was
not above three hundred talents. They lighted on other men's money also,
but not so much as they hoped for; for Herod having a long while had
a suspicion of the perfidiousness of the barbarians, had taken care to
have what was most splendid among his treasures conveyed into Idumea,
as every one belonging to him had in like manner done also. But the
Parthians proceeded to that degree of injustice, as to fill all the
country with war without denouncing it, and to demolish the city
Marissa, and not only to set up Antigonus for king, but to deliver
Phasaelus and Hyrcanus bound into his hands, in order to their being
tormented by him. Antigonus himself also bit off Hyrcanus's ears with
his own teeth, as he fell down upon his knees to him, that so he might
never be able upon any mutation of affairs to take the high priesthood
again, for the high priests that officiated were to be complete, and
without blemish.

10. However, he failed in his purpose of abusing Phasaelus, by reason of
his courage; for though he neither had the command of his sword nor of
his hands, he prevented all abuses by dashing his head against a stone;
so he demonstrated himself to be Herod's own brother, and Hyrcanus a
most degenerate relation, and died with great bravery, and made the end
of his life agreeable to the actions of it. There is also another
report about his end, viz. that he recovered of that stroke, and that
a surgeon, who was sent by Antigonus to heal him, filled the wound with
poisonous ingredients, and so killed him; whichsoever of these deaths
he came to, the beginning of it was glorious. It is also reported that
before he expired he was informed by a certain poor woman how Herod had
escaped out of their hands, and that he said thereupon, "I now die with
comfort, since I leave behind me one alive that will avenge me of mine
enemies."

11. This was the death of Phasaelus; but the Parthians, although they
had failed of the women they chiefly desired, yet did they put the
government of Jerusalem into the hands of Antigonus, and took away
Hyrcanus, and bound him, and carried him to Parthia.






CHAPTER 14.


     When Herod Is Rejected In Arabia, He Makes Haste To Rome
     Where Antony And Caesar Join Their Interest To Make Him King
 .

1. Now Herod did the more zealously pursue his journey into Arabia, as
making haste to get money of the king, while his brother was yet alive;
by which money alone it was that he hoped to prevail upon the covetous
temper of the barbarians to spare Phasaelus; for he reasoned thus with
himself:--that if the Arabian king was too forgetful of his father's
friendship with him, and was too covetous to make him a free gift, he
would however borrow of him as much as might redeem his brother, and
put into his hands, as a pledge, the son of him that was to be redeemed.
Accordingly he led his brother's son along with him, who was of the age
of seven years. Now he was ready to give three hundred talents for his
brother, and intended to desire the intercession of the Tyrians, to get
them accepted; however, fate had been too quick for his diligence;
and since Phasaelus was dead, Herod's brotherly love was now in vain.
Moreover, he was not able to find any lasting friendship among the
Arabians; for their king, Malichus, sent to him immediately, and
commanded him to return back out of his country, and used the name of
the Parthians as a pretense for so doing, as though these had denounced
to him by their ambassadors to cast Herod out of Arabia; while in
reality they had a mind to keep back what they owed to Antipater, and
not be obliged to make requitals to his sons for the free gifts the
father had made them. He also took the impudent advice of those who,
equally with himself, were willing to deprive Herod of what Antipater
had deposited among them; and these men were the most potent of all whom
he had in his kingdom.

2. So when Herod had found that the Arabians were his enemies, and this
for those very reasons whence he hoped they would have been the most
friendly, and had given them such an answer as his passion suggested,
he returned back, and went for Egypt. Now he lodged the first evening at
one of the temples of that country, in order to meet with those whom he
left behind; but on the next day word was brought him, as he was going
to Rhinocurura, that his brother was dead, and how he came by his death;
and when he had lamented him as much as his present circumstances could
bear, he soon laid aside such cares, and proceeded on his journey. But
now, after some time, the king of Arabia repented of what he had done,
and sent presently away messengers to call him back: Herod had prevented
them, and was come to Pelusium, where he could not obtain a passage from
those that lay with the fleet, so he besought their captains to let him
go by them; accordingly, out of the reverence they bore to the fame and
dignity of the man, they conducted him to Alexandria; and when he came
into the city, he was received by Cleopatra with great splendor,
who hoped he might be persuaded to be commander of her forces in the
expedition she was now about; but he rejected the queen's solicitations,
and being neither afrighted at the height of that storm which then
happened, nor at the tumults that were now in Italy, he sailed for Rome.

3. But as he was in peril about Pamphylia, and obliged to cast out
the greatest part of the ship's lading, he with difficulty got safe
to Rhodes, a place which had been grievously harassed in the war with
Cassius. He was there received by his friends, Ptolemy and Sappinius;
and although he was then in want of money, he fitted up a three-decked
ship of very great magnitude, wherein he and his friends sailed to
Brundusium, 21 and went thence to Rome with all speed; where he first
of all went to Antony, on account of the friendship his father had with
him, and laid before him the calamities of himself and his family; and
that he had left his nearest relations besieged in a fortress, and
had sailed to him through a storm, to make supplication to him for
assistance.

4. Hereupon Antony was moved to compassion at the change that had been
made in Herod's affairs, and this both upon his calling to mind how
hospitably he had been treated by Antipater, but more especially on
account of Herod's own virtue; so he then resolved to get him made king
of the Jews, whom he had himself formerly made tetrarch. The contest
also that he had with Antigonus was another inducement, and that of no
less weight than the great regard he had for Herod; for he looked upon
Antigonus as a seditious person, and an enemy of the Romans; and as for
Caesar, Herod found him better prepared than Antony, as remembering
very fresh the wars he had gone through together with his father, the
hospitable treatment he had met with from him, and the entire good-will
he had showed to him; besides the activity which he saw in Herod
himself. So he called the senate together, wherein Messalas, and after
him Atratinus, produced Herod before them, and gave a full account of
the merits of his father, and his own good-will to the Romans. At the
same time they demonstrated that Antigonus was their enemy, not only
because he soon quarreled with them, but because he now overlooked the
Romans, and took the government by the means of the Parthians. These
reasons greatly moved the senate; at which juncture Antony came in, and
told them that it was for their advantage in the Parthian war that Herod
should be king; so they all gave their votes for it. And when the senate
was separated, Antony and Caesar went out, with Herod between them;
while the consul and the rest of the magistrates went before them, in
order to offer sacrifices, and to lay the decree in the Capitol. Antony
also made a feast for Herod on the first day of his reign.






CHAPTER 15.


     Antigonus Besieges Those That Were In Masada, Whom Herod
     Frees From Confinement When He Came Back From Rome, And
     Presently Marches To Jerusalem Where He Finds Silo Corrupted
     By Bribes.

1. Now during this time Antigonus besieged those that were in Masada,
who had all other necessaries in sufficient quantity, but were in want
of water; on which account Joseph, Herod's brother, was disposed to run
away to the Arabians, with two hundred of his own friends, because he
had heard that Malichus repented of his offenses with regard to Herod;
and he had been so quick as to have been gone out of the fortress
already, unless, on that very night when he was going away, there had
fallen a great deal of rain, insomuch that his reservoirs were full of
water, and so he was under no necessity of running away. After which,
therefore, they made an irruption upon Antigonus's party, and slew a
great many of them, some in open battles, and some in private ambush;
nor had they always success in their attempts, for sometimes they were
beaten, and ran away.

2. In the mean time Ventidius, the Roman general, was sent out of Syria,
to restrain the incursions of the Parthians; and after he had done that,
he came into Judea, in pretense indeed to assist Joseph and his party,
but in reality to get money of Antigonus; and when he had pitched his
camp very near to Jerusalem, as soon as he had got money enough, he went
away with the greatest part of his forces; yet still did he leave Silo
with some part of them, lest if he had taken them all away, his taking
of bribes might have been too openly discovered. Now Antigonus hoped
that the Parthians would come again to his assistance, and therefore
cultivated a good understanding with Silo in the mean time, lest any
interruption should be given to his hopes.

3. Now by this time Herod had sailed out of Italy, and was come to
Ptolemais; and as soon as he had gotten together no small army of
foreigners, and of his own countrymen, he marched through Galilee
against Antigonus, wherein he was assisted by Ventidius and Silo, both
whom Dellius, 22 a person sent by Antony, persuaded to bring Herod
[into his kingdom]. Now Ventidius was at this time among the cities, and
composing the disturbances which had happened by means of the Parthians,
as was Silo in Judea corrupted by the bribes that Antigonus had given
him; yet was not Herod himself destitute of power, but the number of his
forces increased every day as he went along, and all Galilee, with few
exceptions, joined themselves to him. So he proposed to himself to set
about his most necessary enterprise, and that was Masada, in order to
deliver his relations from the siege they endured. But still Joppa stood
in his way, and hindered his going thither; for it was necessary to take
that city first, which was in the enemies' hands, that when he should
go to Jerusalem, no fortress might be left in the enemies' power behind
him. Silo also willingly joined him, as having now a plausible occasion
of drawing off his forces [from Jerusalem]; and when the Jews pursued
him, and pressed upon him, [in his retreat,] Herod made all excursion
upon them with a small body of his men, and soon put them to flight, and
saved Silo when he was in distress.

4. After this Herod took Joppa, and then made haste to Masada to free
his relations. Now, as he was marching, many came in to him, induced by
their friendship to his father, some by the reputation he had already
gained himself, and some in order to repay the benefits they had
received from them both; but still what engaged the greatest number on
his side, was the hopes from him when he should be established in his
kingdom; so that he had gotten together already an army hard to be
conquered. But Antigonus laid an ambush for him as he marched out,
in which he did little or no harm to his enemies. However, he easily
recovered his relations again that were in Masada, as well as the
fortress Ressa, and then marched to Jerusalem, where the soldiers that
were with Silo joined themselves to his own, as did many out of the
city, from a dread of his power.

5. Now when he had pitched his camp on the west side of the city, the
guards that were there shot their arrows and threw their darts at them,
while others ran out in companies, and attacked those in the forefront;
but Herod commanded proclamation to be made at the wall, that he was
come for the good of the people and the preservation of the city,
without any design to be revenged on his open enemies, but to grant
oblivion to them, though they had been the most obstinate against him.
Now the soldiers that were for Antigonus made a contrary clamor, and did
neither permit any body to hear that proclamation, nor to change their
party; so Antigonus gave order to his forces to beat the enemy from the
walls; accordingly, they soon threw their darts at them from the towers,
and put them to flight.

6. And here it was that Silo discovered he had taken bribes; for he set
many of the soldiers to clamor about their want of necessaries, and to
require their pay, in order to buy themselves food, and to demand that
he would lead them into places convenient for their winter quarters;
because all the parts about the city were laid waste by the means of
Antigonus's army, which had taken all things away. By this he moved the
army, and attempted to get them off the siege; but Herod went to the
captains that were under Silo, and to a great many of the soldiers, and
begged of them not to leave him, who was sent thither by Caesar, and
Antony, and the senate; for that he would take care to have their wants
supplied that very day. After the making of which entreaty, he went
hastily into the country, and brought thither so great an abundance
of necessaries, that he cut off all Silo's pretenses; and in order to
provide that for the following days they should not want supplies, he
sent to the people that were about Samaria [which city had joined itself
to him] to bring corn, and wine, and oil, and cattle to Jericho. When
Antigonus heard of this, he sent some of his party with orders to
hinder, and lay ambushes for these collectors of corn. This command was
obeyed, and a great multitude of armed men were gathered together about
Jericho, and lay upon the mountains, to watch those that brought the
provisions. Yet was Herod not idle, but took with him ten cohorts, five
of them were Romans, and five were Jewish cohorts, together with
some mercenary troops intermixed among them, and besides those a few
horsemen, and came to Jericho; and when he came, he found the city
deserted, but that there were five hundred men, with their wives and
children, who had taken possession of the tops of the mountains; these
he took, and dismissed them, while the Romans fell upon the rest of the
city, and plundered it, having found the houses full of all sorts of
good things. So the king left a garrison at Jericho, and came back, and
sent the Roman army into those cities which were come over to him, to
take their winter quarters there, viz. into Judea, [or Idumea,] and
Galilee, and Samaria. Antigonus also by bribes obtained of Silo to let a
part of his army be received at Lydda, as a compliment to Antonius.






CHAPTER 16.


     Herod Takes Sepphoris And Subdues The Robbers That Were In
     The Caves; He After That Avenges Himself Upon Machaerus, As
     Upon An Enemy Of His And Goes To Antony As He Was Besieging
     Samosata.

1. So the Romans lived in plenty of all things, and rested from war.
However, Herod did not lie at rest, but seized upon Idumea, and kept it,
with two thousand footmen, and four hundred horsemen; and this he did by
sending his brother Joseph thither, that no innovation might be made by
Antigonus. He also removed his mother, and all his relations, who had
been in Masada, to Samaria; and when he had settled them securely, he
marched to take the remaining parts of Galilee, and to drive away the
garrisons placed there by Antigonus.

2. But when Herod had reached Sepphoris, 23 in a very great snow, he
took the city without any difficulty; the guards that should have kept
it flying away before it was assaulted; where he gave an opportunity
to his followers that had been in distress to refresh themselves, there
being in that city a great abundance of necessaries. After which he
hasted away to the robbers that were in the caves, who overran a great
part of the country, and did as great mischief to its inhabitants as
a war itself could have done. Accordingly, he sent beforehand three
cohorts of footmen, and one troop of horsemen, to the village Arbela,
and came himself forty days afterwards 24 with the rest of his forces
Yet were not the enemy affrighted at his assault but met him in arms;
for their skill was that of warriors, but their boldness was the
boldness of robbers: when therefore it came to a pitched battle,
they put to flight Herod's left wing with their right one; but Herod,
wheeling about on the sudden from his own right wing, came to their
assistance, and both made his own left wing return back from its flight,
and fell upon the pursuers, and cooled their courage, till they could
not bear the attempts that were made directly upon them, and so turned
back and ran away. 3. But Herod followed them, and slew them as he
followed them, and destroyed a great part of them, till those that
remained were scattered beyond the river [Jordan;] and Galilee was
freed from the terrors they had been under, excepting from those that
remained, and lay concealed in caves, which required longer time ere
they could be conquered. In order to which Herod, in the first place,
distributed the fruits of their former labors to the soldiers, and gave
every one of them a hundred and fifty drachmae of silver, and a great
deal more to their commanders, and sent them into their winter quarters.
He also sent to his youngest brother Pheroas, to take care of a good
market for them, where they might buy themselves provisions, and to
build a wall about Alexandrium; who took care of both those injunctions
accordingly.

4. In the mean time Antony abode at Athens, while Ventidius called for
Silo and Herod to come to the war against the Parthians, but ordered
them first to settle the affairs of Judea; so Herod willingly dismissed
Silo to go to Ventidius, but he made an expedition himself against those
that lay in the caves. Now these caves were in the precipices of craggy
mountains, and could not be come at from any side, since they had only
some winding pathways, very narrow, by which they got up to them; but
the rock that lay on their front had beneath it valleys of a vast depth,
and of an almost perpendicular declivity; insomuch that the king
was doubtful for a long time what to do, by reason of a kind of
impossibility there was of attacking the place. Yet did he at length
make use of a contrivance that was subject to the utmost hazard; for he
let down the most hardy of his men in chests, and set them at the mouths
of the dens. Now these men slew the robbers and their families, and when
they made resistance, they sent in fire upon them [and burnt them]; and
as Herod was desirous of saving some of them, he had proclamation made,
that they should come and deliver themselves up to him; but not one of
them came willingly to him; and of those that were compelled to come,
many preferred death to captivity. And here a certain old man, the
father of seven children, whose children, together with their mother,
desired him to give them leave to go out, upon the assurance and right
hand that was offered them, slew them after the following manner: He
ordered every one of them to go out, while he stood himself at the
cave's mouth, and slew that son of his perpetually who went out. Herod
was near enough to see this sight, and his bowels of compassion were
moved at it, and he stretched out his right hand to the old man, and
besought him to spare his children; yet did not he relent at all upon
what he said, but over and above reproached Herod on the lowness of
his descent, and slew his wife as well as his children; and when he had
thrown their dead bodies down the precipice, he at last threw himself
down after them.

5. By this means Herod subdued these caves, and the robbers that were
in them. He then left there a part of his army, as many as he thought
sufficient to prevent any sedition, and made Ptolemy their general, and
returned to Samaria; he led also with him three thousand armed footmen,
and six hundred horsemen, against Antigonus. Now here those that used
to raise tumults in Galilee, having liberty so to do upon his departure,
fell unexpectedly upon Ptolemy, the general of his forces, and slew him;
they also laid the country waste, and then retired to the bogs, and
to places not easily to be found. But when Herod was informed of this
insurrection, he came to the assistance of the country immediately, and
destroyed a great number of the seditions, and raised the sieges of all
those fortresses they had besieged; he also exacted the tribute of a
hundred talents of his enemies, as a penalty for the mutations they had
made in the country.

6. By this time [the Parthians being already driven out of the country,
and Pacorus slain] Ventidius, by Antony's command, sent a thousand
horsemen, and two legions, as auxiliaries to Herod, against Antigonus.
Now Antigonus besought Machaerus, who was their general, by letter, to
come to his assistance, and made a great many mournful complaints about
Herod's violence, and about the injuries he did to the kingdom; and
promised to give him money for such his assistance; but he complied not
with his invitation to betray his trust, for he did not contemn him that
sent him, especially while Herod gave him more money [than the other
offered]. So he pretended friendship to Antigonus, but came as a spy to
discover his affairs; although he did not herein comply with Herod, who
dissuaded him from so doing. But Antigonus perceived what his intentions
were beforehand, and excluded him out of the city, and defended himself
against him as against an enemy, from the walls; till Machaerus was
ashamed of what he had done, and retired to Emmaus to Herod; and as he
was in a rage at his disappointment, he slew all the Jews whom he met
with, without sparing those that were for Herod, but using them all as
if they were for Antigonus.

7. Hereupon Herod was very angry at him, and was going to fight against
Machaerus as his enemy; but he restrained his indignation, and marched
to Antony to accuse Machaerus of maladministration. But Machaerus was
made sensible of his offenses, and followed after the king immediately,
and earnestly begged and obtained that he would be reconciled to him.
However, Herod did not desist from his resolution of going to Antony;
but when he heard that he was besieging Samosata 25 with a great army,
which is a strong city near to Euphrates, he made the greater haste;
as observing that this was a proper opportunity for showing at once his
courage, and for doing what would greatly oblige Antony. Indeed, when he
came, he soon made an end of that siege, and slew a great number of the
barbarians, and took from them a large prey; insomuch that Antony, who
admired his courage formerly, did now admire it still more. Accordingly,
he heaped many more honors upon him, and gave him more assured hopes
that he should gain his kingdom; and now king Antiochus was forced to
deliver up Samosata.






CHAPTER 17.


     The Death Of Joseph [Herod's Brother] Which Had Been
     Signified To Herod In Dreams. How Herod Was Preserved Twice
     After A Wonderful Manner. He Cuts Off The Head Of Pappus,
     Who Was The Murderer Of His Brother And Sends That Head To
     [His Other Brother] Pheroras, And In No Long Time He
     Besieges Jerusalem And Marries Mariamne.

1. In the mean time, Herod's affairs in Judea were in an ill state. He
had left his brother Joseph with full power, but had charged him to make
no attempts against Antigonus till his return; for that Machaerus would
not be such an assistant as he could depend on, as it appeared by what
he had done already; but as soon as Joseph heard that his brother was
at a very great distance, he neglected the charge he had received, and
marched towards Jericho with five cohorts, which Machaerus sent with
him. This movement was intended for seizing on the corn, as it was
now in the midst of summer; but when his enemies attacked him in the
mountains, and in places which were difficult to pass, he was both
killed himself, as he was very bravely fighting in the battle, and the
entire Roman cohorts were destroyed; for these cohorts were new-raised
men, gathered out of Syria, and here was no mixture of those called
veteran soldiers among them, who might have supported those that were
unskillful in war.

2. This victory was not sufficient for Antigonus; but he proceeded to
that degree of rage, as to treat the dead body of Joseph barbarously;
for when he had got possession of the bodies of those that were slain,
he cut off his head, although his brother Pheroras would have given
fifty talents as a price of redemption for it. And now the affairs of
Galilee were put in such disorder after this victory of Antigonus's,
that those of Antigonus's party brought the principal men that were
on Herod's side to the lake, and there drowned them. There was a great
change made also in Idumea, where Machaerus was building a wall about
one of the fortresses, which was called Gittha. But Herod had not yet
been informed of these things; for after the taking of Samosata, and
when Antony had set Sosius over the affairs of Syria, and had given him
orders to assist Herod against Antigonus, he departed into Egypt; but
Sosius sent two legions before him into Judea to assist Herod, and
followed himself soon after with the rest of his army.

3. Now when Herod was at Daphne, by Antioch, he had some dreams which
clearly foreboded his brother's death; and as he leaped out of his bed
in a disturbed manner, there came messengers that acquainted him with
that calamity. So when he had lamented this misfortune for a while, he
put off the main part of his mourning, and made haste to march against
his enemies; and when he had performed a march that was above his
strength, and was gone as far as Libanus, he got him eight hundred men
of those that lived near to that mountain as his assistants, and joined
with them one Roman legion, with which, before it was day, he made an
irruption into Galilee, and met his enemies, and drove them back to
the place which they had left. He also made an immediate and continual
attack upon the fortress. Yet was he forced by a most terrible storm to
pitch his camp in the neighboring villages before he could take it. But
when, after a few days' time, the second legion, that came from Antony,
joined themselves to him, the enemy were affrighted at his power, and
left their fortifications in the night time.

4. After this he marched through Jericho, as making what haste he
could to be avenged on his brother's murderers; where happened to him
a providential sign, out of which, when he had unexpectedly escaped,
he had the reputation of being very dear to God; for that evening there
feasted with him many of the principal men; and after that feast was
over, and all the guests were gone out, the house fell down immediately.
And as he judged this to be a common signal of what dangers he should
undergo, and how he should escape them in the war that he was going
about, he, in the morning, set forward with his army, when about six
thousand of his enemies came running down from the mountains, and began
to fight with those in his forefront; yet durst they not be so very bold
as to engage the Romans hand to hand, but threw stones and darts at them
at a distance; by which means they wounded a considerable number; in
which action Herod's own side was wounded with a dart.

5. Now as Antigonus had a mind to appear to exceed Herod, not only in
the courage, but in the number of his men, he sent Pappus, one of his
companions, with an army against Samaria, whose fortune it was to oppose
Machaerus; but Herod overran the enemy's country, and demolished five
little cities, and destroyed two thousand men that were in them,
and burned their houses, and then returned to his camp; but his
head-quarters were at the village called Cana.

6. Now a great multitude of Jews resorted to him every day, both out of
Jericho and the other parts of the country. Some were moved so to do
out of their hatred to Antigonus, and some out of regard to the glorious
actions Herod had done; but others were led on by an unreasonable desire
of change; so he fell upon them immediately. As for Pappus and his
party, they were not terrified either at their number or at their zeal,
but marched out with great alacrity to fight them; and it came to a
close fight. Now other parts of their army made resistance for a while;
but Herod, running the utmost hazard, out of the rage he was in at the
murder of his brother, that he might be avenged on those that had been
the authors of it, soon beat those that opposed him; and after he had
beaten them, he always turned his force against those that stood to it
still, and pursued them all; so that a great slaughter was made, while
some were forced back into that village whence they came out; he also
pressed hard upon the hindermost, and slew a vast number of them; he
also fell into the village with the enemy, where every house was filled
with armed men, and the upper rooms were crowded above with soldiers for
their defense; and when he had beaten those that were on the outside,
he pulled the houses to pieces, and plucked out those that were within;
upon many he had the roofs shaken down, whereby they perished by heaps;
and as for those that fled out of the ruins, the soldiers received them
with their swords in their hands; and the multitude of those slain and
lying on heaps was so great, that the conquerors could not pass along
the roads. Now the enemy could not bear this blow, so that when the
multitude of them which was gathered together saw that those in the
village were slain, they dispersed themselves, and fled away; upon the
confidence of which victory, Herod had marched immediately to Jerusalem,
unless he tad been hindered by the depth of winter's [coming on]. This
was the impediment that lay in the way of this his entire glorious
progress, and was what hindered Antigonus from being now conquered, who
was already disposed to forsake the city.

7. Now when at the evening Herod had already dismissed his friends to
refresh themselves after their fatigue, and when he was gone himself,
while he was still hot in his armor, like a common soldier, to bathe
himself, and had but one servant that attended him, and before he was
gotten into the bath, one of the enemies met him in the face with a
sword in his hand, and then a second, and then a third, and after that
more of them; these were men who had run away out of the battle into
the bath in their armor, and they had lain there for some time in, great
terror, and in privacy; and when they saw the king, they trembled for
fear, and ran by him in a flight, although he was naked, and endeavored
to get off into the public road. Now there was by chance nobody else at
hand that might seize upon these men; and for Herod, he was contented to
have come to no harm himself, so that they all got away in safety.

8. But on the next day Herod had Pappus's head cut off, who was the
general for Antigonus, and was slain in the battle, and sent it to his
brother Pheroras, by way of punishment for their slain brother; for he
was the man that slew Joseph. Now as winter was going off, Herod marched
to Jerusalem, and brought his army to the wall of it; this was the third
year since he had been made king at Rome; so he pitched his camp before
the temple, for on that side it might be besieged, and there it was
that Pompey took the city. So he parted the work among the army, and
demolished the suburbs, end raised three banks, and gave orders to
have towers built upon those banks, and left the most laborious of his
acquaintance at the works. But he went himself to Samaria, to take the
daughter of Alexander, the son of Aristobulus, to wife, who had
been betrothed to him before, as we have already said; and thus he
accomplished this by the by, during the siege of the city, for he had
his enemies in great contempt already.

9. When he had thus married Mariamne, he came back to Jerusalem with a
greater army. Sosius also joined him with a large army, both of horsemen
and footmen, which he sent before him through the midland parts, while
he marched himself along Phoenicia; and when the whole army was gotten
together, which were eleven regiments of footmen, and six thousand
horsemen, besides the Syrian auxiliaries, which were no small part
of the army, they pitched their camp near to the north wall. Herod's
dependence was upon the decree of the senate, by which he was made king;
and Sosius relied upon Antony, who sent the army that was under him to
Herod's assistance.






CHAPTER 18.


     How Herod And Sosius Took Jerusalem By Force; And What Death
     Antigonus Came To. Also Concerning Cleopatra's Avaricious
     Temper.

1. Now the multitude of the Jews that were in the city were divided into
several factions; for the people that crowded about the temple, being
the weaker part of them, gave it out that, as the times were, he was the
happiest and most religious man who should die first. But as to the
more bold and hardy men, they got together in bodies, and fell a robbing
others after various manners, and these particularly plundered the
places that were about the city, and this because there was no food left
either for the horses or the men; yet some of the warlike men, who were
used to fight regularly, were appointed to defend the city during the
siege, and these drove those that raised the banks away from the
wall; and these were always inventing some engine or another to be a
hinderance to the engines of the enemy; nor had they so much success any
way as in the mines under ground.

2. Now as for the robberies which were committed, the king contrived
that ambushes should be so laid, that they might restrain their
excursions; and as for the want of provisions, he provided that they
should be brought to them from great distances. He was also too hard
for the Jews, by the Romans' skill in the art of war; although they were
bold to the utmost degree, now they durst not come to a plain battle
with the Romans, which was certain death; but through their mines under
ground they would appear in the midst of them on the sudden, and before
they could batter down one wall, they built them another in its
stead; and to sum up all at once, they did not show any want either of
painstaking or of contrivances, as having resolved to hold out to the
very last. Indeed, though they had so great an army lying round about
them, they bore a siege of five months, till some of Herod's chosen men
ventured to get upon the wall, and fell into the city, as did Sosius's
centurions after them; and now they first of all seized upon what
was about the temple; and upon the pouring in of the army, there was
slaughter of vast multitudes every where, by reason of the rage the
Romans were in at the length of this siege, and by reason that the Jews
who were about Herod earnestly endeavored that none of their adversaries
might remain; so they were cut to pieces by great multitudes, as they
were crowded together in narrow streets, and in houses, or were running
away to the temple; nor was there any mercy showed either to infants, or
to the aged, or to the weaker sex; insomuch that although the king sent
about and desired them to spare the people, nobody could be persuaded
to withhold their right hand from slaughter, but they slew people of all
ages, like madmen. Then it was that Antigonus, without any regard to his
former or to his present fortune, came down from the citadel, and fell
at Sosius's feet, who without pitying him at all, upon the change of his
condition, laughed at him beyond measure, and called him Antigona. 26
Yet did he not treat him like a woman, or let him go free, but put him
into bonds, and kept him in custody.

3. But Herod's concern at present, now he had gotten his enemies under
his power, was to restrain the zeal of his foreign auxiliaries; for the
multitude of the strange people were very eager to see the temple, and
what was sacred in the holy house itself; but the king endeavored to
restrain them, partly by his exhortations, partly by his threatenings,
nay, partly by force, as thinking the victory worse than a defeat to
him, if any thing that ought not to be seen were seen by them. He also
forbade, at the same time, the spoiling of the city, asking Sosius in
the most earnest manner, whether the Romans, by thus emptying the city
of money and men, had a mind to leave him king of a desert,--and told
him that he judged the dominion of the habitable earth too small a
compensation for the slaughter of so many citizens. And when Sosius said
that it was but just to allow the soldiers this plunder as a reward for
what they suffered during the siege, Herod made answer, that he would
give every one of the soldiers a reward out of his own money. So he
purchased the deliverance of his country, and performed his promises to
them, and made presents after a magnificent manner to each soldier,
and proportionably to their commanders, and with a most royal bounty
to Sosius himself, whereby nobody went away but in a wealthy condition.
Hereupon Sosius dedicated a crown of gold to God, and then went away
from Jerusalem, leading Antigonus away in bonds to Antony; then did the
axe bring him to his end, 27 who still had a fond desire of life, and
some frigid hopes of it to the last, but by his cowardly behavior well
deserved to die by it.

4. Hereupon king Herod distinguished the multitude that was in the city;
and for those that were of his side, he made them still more his friends
by the honors he conferred on them; but for those of Antigonus's party,
he slew them; and as his money ran low, he turned all the ornaments he
had into money, and sent it to Antony, and to those about him. Yet could
he not hereby purchase an exemption from all sufferings; for Antony was
now bewitched by his love to Cleopatra, and was entirely conquered by
her charms. Now Cleopatra had put to death all her kindred, till no
one near her in blood remained alive, and after that she fell a slaying
those no way related to her. So she calumniated the principal men among
the Syrians to Antony, and persuaded him to have them slain, that so she
might easily gain to be mistress of what they had; nay, she extended her
avaricious humor to the Jews and Arabians, and secretly labored to have
Herod and Malichus, the kings of both those nations, slain by his order.

5. Now is to these her injunctions to Antony, he complied in part; for
though he esteemed it too abominable a thing to kill such good and great
kings, yet was he thereby alienated from the friendship he had for
them. He also took away a great deal of their country; nay, even the
plantation of palm trees at Jericho, where also grows the balsam tree,
and bestowed them upon her; as also all the cities on this side the
river Eleutherus, Tyre and Sidon 28 excepted. And when she was become
mistress of these, and had conducted Antony in his expedition against
the Parthians as far as Euphrates, she came by Apamia and Damascus
into Judea and there did Herod pacify her indignation at him by large
presents. He also hired of her those places that had been torn away from
his kingdom, at the yearly rent of two hundred talents. He conducted her
also as far as Pelusium, and paid her all the respects possible. Now it
was not long after this that Antony was come back from Parthia, and led
with him Artabazes, Tigranes's son, captive, as a present for Cleopatra;
for this Parthian was presently given her, with his money, and all the
prey that was taken with him.






CHAPTER 19.


     How Antony At The Persuasion Of Cleopatra Sent Herod To
     Fight Against The Arabians; And Now After Several Battles,
     He At Length Got The Victory. As Also Concerning A Great
     Earthquake.

1. Now when the war about Actium was begun, Herod prepared to come to
the assistance of Antony, as being already freed from his troubles in
Judea, and having gained Hyrcania, which was a place that was held by
Antigonus's sister. However, he was cunningly hindered from partaking of
the hazards that Antony went through by Cleopatra; for since, as we
have already noted, she had laid a plot against the kings [of Judea
and Arabia], she prevailed with Antony to commit the war against the
Arabians to Herod; that so, if he got the better, she might become
mistress of Arabia, or, if he were worsted, of Judea; and that she might
destroy one of those kings by the other.

2. However, this contrivance tended to the advantage of Herod; for at
the very first he took hostages from the enemy, and got together a great
body of horse, and ordered them to march against them about Diespous;
and he conquered that army, although it fought resolutely against him.
After which defeat, the Arabians were in great motion, and assembled
themselves together at Kanatha, a city of Celesyria, in vast multitudes,
and waited for the Jews. And when Herod was come thither, he tried to
manage this war with particular prudence, and gave orders that they
should build a wall about their camp; yet did not the multitude comply
with those orders, but were so emboldened by their foregoing victory,
that they presently attacked the Arabians, and beat them at the first
onset, and then pursued them; yet were there snares laid for Herod in
that pursuit; while Athenio, who was one of Cleopatra's generals, and
always an antagonist to Herod, sent out of Kanatha the men of that
country against him; for, upon this fresh onset, the Arabians took
courage, and returned back, and both joined their numerous forces about
stony places, that were hard to be gone over, and there put Herod's men
to the rout, and made a great slaughter of them; but those that escaped
out of the battle fled to Ormiza, where the Arabians surrounded their
camp, and took it, with all the men in it. 3. In a little time after
this calamity, Herod came to bring them succors; but he came too late.
Now the occasion of that blow was this, that the officers would not obey
orders; for had not the fight begun so suddenly, Athenio had not found
a proper season for the snares he laid for Herod: however, he was even
with the Arabians afterward, and overran their country, and did them
more harm than their single victory could compensate. But as he
was avenging himself on his enemies, there fell upon him another
providential calamity; for in the seventh 29 year of his reign, when the
war about Actium was at the height, at the beginning of the spring, the
earth was shaken, and destroyed an immense number of cattle, with thirty
thousand men; but the army received no harm, because it lay in the open
air. In the mean time, the fame of this earthquake elevated the Arabians
to greater courage, and this by augmenting it to a fabulous height, as
is constantly the case in melancholy accidents, and pretending that all
Judea was overthrown. Upon this supposal, therefore, that they should
easily get a land that was destitute of inhabitants into their power,
they first sacrificed those ambassadors who were come to them from the
Jews, and then marched into Judea immediately. Now the Jewish nation
were affrighted at this invasion, and quite dispirited at the greatness
of their calamities one after another; whom yet Herod got together, and
endeavored to encourage to defend themselves by the following speech
which he made to them:

4. "The present dread you are under seems to me to have seized upon
you very unreasonably. It is true, you might justly be dismayed at
that providential chastisement which hath befallen you; but to suffer
yourselves to be equally terrified at the invasion of men is unmanly. As
for myself, I am so far from being affrighted at our enemies after this
earthquake, that I imagine that God hath thereby laid a bait for the
Arabians, that we may be avenged on them; for their present invasion
proceeds more from our accidental misfortunes, than that they have any
great dependence on their weapons, or their own fitness for action.
Now that hope which depends not on men's own power, but on others' ill
success, is a very ticklish thing; for there is no certainty among men,
either in their bad or good fortunes; but we may easily observe that
fortune is mutable, and goes from one side to another; and this you may
readily learn from examples among yourselves; for when you were once
victors in the former fight, your enemies overcame you at last; and very
likely it will now happen so, that these who think themselves sure of
beating you will themselves be beaten. For when men are very confident,
they are not upon their guard, while fear teaches men to act with
caution; insomuch that I venture to prove from your very timorousness
that you ought to take courage; for when you were more bold than you
ought to have been, and than I would have had you, and marched on,
Athenio's treachery took place; but your present slowness and seeming
dejection of mind is to me a pledge and assurance of victory. And
indeed it is proper beforehand to be thus provident; but when we come
to action, we ought to erect our minds, and to make our enemies, be they
ever so wicked, believe that neither any human, no, nor any providential
misfortune, can ever depress the courage of Jews while they are alive;
nor will any of them ever overlook an Arabian, or suffer such a one to
become lord of his good things, whom he has in a manner taken captive,
and that many times also. And do not you disturb yourselves at the
quaking of inanimate creatures, nor do you imagine that this earthquake
is a sign of another calamity; for such affections of the elements are
according to the course of nature, nor does it import any thing further
to men, than what mischief it does immediately of itself. Perhaps there
may come some short sign beforehand in the case of pestilences, and
famines, and earthquakes; but these calamities themselves have their
force limited by themselves [without foreboding any other calamity]. And
indeed what greater mischief can the war, though it should be a violent
one, do to us than the earthquake hath done? Nay, there is a signal of
our enemies' destruction visible, and that a very great one also; and
this is not a natural one, nor derived from the hand of foreigners
neither, but it is this, that they have barbarously murdered our
ambassadors, contrary to the common law of mankind; and they have
destroyed so many, as if they esteemed them sacrifices for God, in
relation to this war. But they will not avoid his great eye, nor his
invincible right hand; and we shall be revenged of them presently, in
case we still retain any of the courage of our forefathers, and rise up
boldly to punish these covenant-breakers. Let every one therefore go on
and fight, not so much for his wife or his children, or for the
danger his country is in, as for these ambassadors of ours; those dead
ambassadors will conduct this war of ours better than we ourselves who
are alive. And if you will be ruled by me, I will myself go before
you into danger; for you know this well enough, that your courage is
irresistible, unless you hurt yourselves by acting rashly." 30

5. When Herod had encouraged them by this speech, and he saw with
what alacrity they went, he offered sacrifice to God; and after that
sacrifice, he passed over the river Jordan with his army, and pitched
his camp about Philadelphia, near the enemy, and about a fortification
that lay between them. He then shot at them at a distance, and was
desirous to come to an engagement presently; for some of them had been
sent beforehand to seize upon that fortification: but the king sent some
who immediately beat them out of the fortification, while he himself
went in the forefront of the army, which he put in battle-array every
day, and invited the Arabians to fight. But as none of them came out
of their camp, for they were in a terrible fright, and their general,
Elthemus, was not able to say a word for fear,--so Herod came upon
them, and pulled their fortification to pieces, by which means they were
compelled to come out to fight, which they did in disorder, and so that
the horsemen and foot-men were mixed together. They were indeed superior
to the Jews in number, but inferior in their alacrity, although they
were obliged to expose themselves to danger by their very despair of
victory.

6. Now while they made opposition, they had not a great number slain;
but as soon as they turned their backs, a great many were trodden to
pieces by the Jews, and a great many by themselves, and so perished,
till five thousand were fallen down dead in their flight, while the rest
of the multitude prevented their immediate death, by crowding into the
fortification. Herod encompassed these around, and besieged them; and
while they were ready to be taken by their enemies in arms, they had
another additional distress upon them, which was thirst and want of
water; for the king was above hearkening to their ambassadors; and when
they offered five hundred talents, as the price of their redemption,
he pressed still harder upon them. And as they were burnt up by their
thirst, they came out and voluntarily delivered themselves up by
multitudes to the Jews, till in five days' time four thousand of them
were put into bonds; and on the sixth day the multitude that were left
despaired of saving themselves, and came out to fight: with these Herod
fought, and slew again about seven thousand, insomuch that he punished
Arabia so severely, and so far extinguished the spirits of the men, that
he was chosen by the nation for their ruler.






CHAPTER 20.


     Herod Is Confirmed In His Kingdom By Caesar, And Cultivates
     A Friendship With The Emperor By Magnificent Presents; While
     Caesar Returns His Kindness By Bestowing On Him That Part Of
     His Kingdom Which Had Been Taken Away From It By Cleopatra
     With The Addition Of Zenodoruss Country Also.

1. But now Herod was under immediate concern about a most important
affair, on account of his friendship with Antony, who was already
overcome at Actium by Caesar; yet he was more afraid than hurt; for
Caesar did not think he had quite undone Antony, while Herod continued
his assistance to him. However, the king resolved to expose himself to
dangers: accordingly he sailed to Rhodes, where Caesar then abode, and
came to him without his diadem, and in the habit and appearance of a
private person, but in his behavior as a king. So he concealed nothing
of the truth, but spoke thus before his face: "O Caesar, as I was made
king of the Jews by Antony, so do I profess that I have used my royal
authority in the best manner, and entirely for his advantage; nor will I
conceal this further, that thou hadst certainly found me in arms, and an
inseparable companion of his, had not the Arabians hindered me. However,
I sent him as many auxiliaries as I was able, and many ten thousand
[cori] of corn. Nay, indeed, I did not desert my benefactor after the
bow that was given him at Actium; but I gave him the best advice I was
able, when I was no longer able to assist him in the war; and I told him
that there was but one way of recovering his affairs, and that was to
kill Cleopatra; and I promised him that, if she were once dead, I would
afford him money and walls for his security, with an army and myself
to assist him in his war against thee: but his affections for Cleopatra
stopped his ears, as did God himself also who hath bestowed the
government on thee. I own myself also to be overcome together with
him; and with his last fortune I have laid aside my diadem, and am come
hither to thee, having my hopes of safety in thy virtue; and I desire
that thou wilt first consider how faithful a friend, and not whose
friend, I have been."

2. Caesar replied to him thus: "Nay, thou shalt not only be in safety,
but thou shalt be a king; and that more firmly than thou wast before;
for thou art worthy to reign over a great many subjects, by reason
of the fastness of thy friendship; and do thou endeavor to be equally
constant in thy friendship to me, upon my good success, which is what I
depend upon from the generosity of thy disposition. However, Antony hath
done well in preferring Cleopatra to thee; for by this means we have
gained thee by her madness, and thus thou hast begun to be my friend
before I began to be thine; on which account Quintus Didius hath written
to me that thou sentest him assistance against the gladiators. I do
therefore assure thee that I will confirm the kingdom to thee by decree:
I shall also endeavor to do thee some further kindness hereafter, that
thou mayst find no loss in the want of Antony."

3. When Caesar had spoken such obliging things to the king, and had put
the diadem again about his head, he proclaimed what he had bestowed on
him by a decree, in which he enlarged in the commendation of the man
after a magnificent manner. Whereupon Herod obliged him to be kind
to him by the presents he gave him, and he desired him to forgive
Alexander, one of Antony's friends, who was become a supplicant to him.
But Caesar's anger against him prevailed, and he complained of the many
and very great offenses the man whom he petitioned for had been guilty
of; and by that means he rejected his petition. After this Caesar went
for Egypt through Syria, when Herod received him with royal and rich
entertainments; and then did he first of all ride along with Caesar, as
he was reviewing his army about Ptolemais, and feasted him with all
his friends, and then distributed among the rest of the army what was
necessary to feast them withal. He also made a plentiful provision of
water for them, when they were to march as far as Pelusium, through a
dry country, which he did also in like manner at their return thence;
nor were there any necessaries wanting to that army. It was therefore
the opinion, both of Caesar and of his soldiers, that Herod's kingdom
was too small for those generous presents he made them; for which
reason, when Caesar was come into Egypt, and Cleopatra and Antony were
dead, he did not only bestow other marks of honor upon him, but made an
addition to his kingdom, by giving him not only the country which had
been taken from him by Cleopatra, but besides that, Gadara, and Hippos,
and Samaria; and moreover, of the maritime cities, Gaza 31 and Anthedon,
and Joppa, and Strato's Tower. He also made him a present of four
hundred Galls [Galatians] as a guard for his body, which they had been
to Cleopatra before. Nor did any thing so strongly induce Caesar to make
these presents as the generosity of him that received them.

4. Moreover, after the first games at Actium, he added to his kingdom
both the region called Trachonitis, and what lay in its neighborhood,
Batanea, and the country of Auranitis; and that on the following
occasion: Zenodorus, who had hired the house of Lysanias, had all along
sent robbers out of Trachonitis among the Damascenes; who thereupon had
recourse to Varro, the president of Syria, and desired of him that he
would represent the calamity they were in to Caesar. When Caesar was
acquainted with it, he sent back orders that this nest of robbers should
be destroyed. Varro therefore made an expedition against them, and
cleared the land of those men, and took it away from Zenodorus. Caesar
did also afterward bestow it on Herod, that it might not again become
a receptacle for those robbers that had come against Damascus. He
also made him a procurator of all Syria, and this on the tenth year
afterward, when he came again into that province; and this was so
established, that the other procurators could not do any thing in the
administration without his advice: but when Zenodorus was dead, Caesar
bestowed on him all that land which lay between Trachonitis and Galilee.
Yet, what was still of more consequence to Herod, he was beloved by
Caesar next after Agrippa, and by Agrippa next after Caesar; whence he
arrived at a very great degree of felicity. Yet did the greatness of his
soul exceed it, and the main part of his magnanimity was extended to the
promotion of piety.






CHAPTER 21.


     Of The [Temple And] Cities That Were Built By Herod And
     Erected From The Very Foundations; As Also Of Those Other
     Edifices That Were Erected By Him; And What Magnificence He
     Showed To Foreigners; And How Fortune Was In All Things
     Favorable To Him.

1. Accordingly, in the fifteenth year of his reign, Herod rebuilt the
temple, and encompassed a piece of land about it with a wall, which land
was twice as large as that before enclosed. The expenses he laid
out upon it were vastly large also, and the riches about it were
unspeakable. A sign of which you have in the great cloisters that were
erected about the temple, and the citadel which was on its north side.
The cloisters he built from the foundation, but the citadel 32 he
repaired at a vast expense; nor was it other than a royal palace, which
he called Antonia, in honor of Antony. He also built himself a palace in
the Upper city, containing two very large and most beautiful apartments;
to which the holy house itself could not be compared [in largeness]. The
one apartment he named Caesareum, and the other Agrippium, from his [two
great] friends.

2. Yet did he not preserve their memory by particular buildings only,
with their names given them, but his generosity went as far as entire
cities; for when he had built a most beautiful wall round a country in
Samaria, twenty furlongs long, and had brought six thousand inhabitants
into it, and had allotted to it a most fruitful piece of land, and in
the midst of this city, thus built, had erected a very large temple to
Caesar, and had laid round about it a portion of sacred land of three
furlongs and a half, he called the city Sebaste, from Sebastus, or
Augustus, and settled the affairs of the city after a most regular
manner.

3. And when Caesar had further bestowed upon him another additional
country, he built there also a temple of white marble, hard by the
fountains of Jordan: the place is called Panium, where is a top of a
mountain that is raised to an immense height, and at its side, beneath,
or at its bottom, a dark cave opens itself; within which there is a
horrible precipice, that descends abruptly to a vast depth; it contains
a mighty quantity of water, which is immovable; and when any body lets
down any thing to measure the depth of the earth beneath the water, no
length of cord is sufficient to reach it. Now the fountains of Jordan
rise at the roots of this cavity outwardly; and, as some think, this
is the utmost origin of Jordan: but we shall speak of that matter more
accurately in our following history.

4. But the king erected other places at Jericho also, between the
citadel Cypros and the former palace, such as were better and more
useful than the former for travelers, and named them from the same
friends of his. To say all at once, there was not any place of his
kingdom fit for the purpose that was permitted to be without somewhat
that was for Caesar's honor; and when he had filled his own country with
temples, he poured out the like plentiful marks of his esteem into his
province, and built many cities which he called Cesareas.

5. And when he observed that there was a city by the sea-side that was
much decayed, [its name was Strato's Tower,] but that the place, by the
happiness of its situation, was capable of great improvements from his
liberality, he rebuilt it all with white stone, and adorned it with
several most splendid palaces, wherein he especially demonstrated his
magnanimity; for the case was this, that all the sea-shore between Dora
and Joppa, in the middle, between which this city is situated, had no
good haven, insomuch that every one that sailed from Phoenicia for Egypt
was obliged to lie in the stormy sea, by reason of the south winds that
threatened them; which wind, if it blew but a little fresh, such vast
waves are raised, and dash upon the rocks, that upon their retreat the
sea is in a great ferment for a long way. But the king, by the expenses
he was at, and the liberal disposal of them, overcame nature, and built
a haven larger than was the Pyrecum 33 [at Athens]; and in the inner
retirements of the water he built other deep stations [for the ships
also].

6. Now although the place where he built was greatly opposite to his
purposes, yet did he so fully struggle with that difficulty, that the
firmness of his building could not easily be conquered by the sea; and
the beauty and ornament of the works were such, as though he had not had
any difficulty in the operation; for when he had measured out as large a
space as we have before mentioned, he let down stones into twenty fathom
water, the greatest part of which were fifty feet in length, and nine in
depth, and ten in breadth, and some still larger. But when the haven was
filled up to that depth, he enlarged that wall which was thus already
extant above the sea, till it was two hundred feet wide; one hundred of
which had buildings before it, in order to break the force of the waves,
whence it was called Procumatia, or the first breaker of the waves; but
the rest of the space was under a stone wall that ran round it. On this
wall were very large towers, the principal and most beautiful of which
was called Drusium, from Drusus, who was son-in-law to Caesar.

7. There were also a great number of arches, where the mariners dwelt;
and all the places before them round about was a large valley, or walk,
for a quay [or landing-place] to those that came on shore; but the
entrance was on the north, because the north wind was there the most
gentle of all the winds. At the mouth of the haven were on each side
three great Colossi, supported by pillars, where those Colossi that are
on your left hand as you sail into the port are supported by a solid
tower; but those on the right hand are supported by two upright stones
joined together, which stones were larger than that tower which was on
the other side of the entrance. Now there were continual edifices joined
to the haven, which were also themselves of white stone; and to this
haven did the narrow streets of the city lead, and were built at equal
distances one from another. And over against the mouth of the haven,
upon an elevation, there was a temple for Caesar, which was excellent
both in beauty and largeness; and therein was a Colossus of Caesar, not
less than that of Jupiter Olympius, which it was made to resemble.
The other Colossus of Rome was equal to that of Juno at Argos. So he
dedicated the city to the province, and the haven to the sailors there;
but the honor of the building he ascribed to Caesar, 34 and named it
Cesarea accordingly.

8. He also built the other edifices, the amphitheater, and theater, and
market-place, in a manner agreeable to that denomination; and appointed
games every fifth year, and called them, in like manner, Caesar's
Games; and he first himself proposed the largest prizes upon the hundred
ninety-second olympiad; in which not only the victors themselves, but
those that came next to them, and even those that came in the third
place, were partakers of his royal bounty. He also rebuilt Anthedon,
a city that lay on the coast, and had been demolished in the wars, and
named it Agrippeum. Moreover, he had so very great a kindness for his
friend Agrippa, that he had his name engraved upon that gate which he
had himself erected in the temple.

9. Herod was also a lover of his father, if any other person ever was
so; for he made a monument for his father, even that city which he built
in the finest plain that was in his kingdom, and which had rivers and
trees in abundance, and named it Antipatris. He also built a wall about
a citadel that lay above Jericho, and was a very strong and very
fine building, and dedicated it to his mother, and called it Cypros.
Moreover, he dedicated a tower that was at Jerusalem, and called it
by the name of his brother Phasaelus, whose structure, largeness, and
magnificence we shall describe hereafter. He also built another city in
the valley that leads northward from Jericho, and named it Phasaelis.

10. And as he transmitted to eternity his family and friends, so did he
not neglect a memorial for himself, but built a fortress upon a mountain
towards Arabia, and named it from himself, Herodium 35 and he called
that hill that was of the shape of a woman's breast, and was sixty
furlongs distant from Jerusalem, by the same name. He also bestowed much
curious art upon it, with great ambition, and built round towers all
about the top of it, and filled up the remaining space with the most
costly palaces round about, insomuch that not only the sight of the
inner apartments was splendid, but great wealth was laid out on the
outward walls, and partitions, and roofs also. Besides this, he brought
a mighty quantity of water from a great distance, and at vast charges,
and raised an ascent to it of two hundred steps of the whitest marble,
for the hill was itself moderately high, and entirely factitious. He
also built other palaces about the roots of the hill, sufficient to
receive the furniture that was put into them, with his friends also,
insomuch that, on account of its containing all necessaries, the
fortress might seem to be a city, but, by the bounds it had, a palace
only.

11. And when he had built so much, he showed the greatness of his soul
to no small number of foreign cities. He built palaces for exercise at
Tripoli, and Damascus, and Ptolemais; he built a wall about Byblus,
as also large rooms, and cloisters, and temples, and market-places at
Berytus and Tyre, with theatres at Sidon and Damascus. He also built
aqueducts for those Laodiceans who lived by the sea-side; and for those
of Ascalon he built baths and costly fountains, as also cloisters round
a court, that were admirable both for their workmanship and largeness.
Moreover, he dedicated groves and meadows to some people; nay, not a few
cities there were who had lands of his donation, as if they were parts
of his own kingdom. He also bestowed annual revenues, and those for ever
also, on the settlements for exercises, and appointed for them, as well
as for the people of Cos, that such rewards should never be wanting. He
also gave corn to all such as wanted it, and conferred upon Rhodes large
sums of money for building ships; and this he did in many places,
and frequently also. And when Apollo's temple had been burnt down, he
rebuilt it at his own charges, after a better manner than it was before.
What need I speak of the presents he made to the Lycians and Samnians?
or of his great liberality through all Ionia? and that according
to every body's wants of them. And are not the Athenians, and
Lacedemonians, and Nicopolitans, and that Pergamus which is in Mysia,
full of donations that Herod presented them withal? And as for that
large open place belonging to Antioch in Syria, did not he pave it with
polished marble, though it were twenty furlongs long? and this when
it was shunned by all men before, because it was full of dirt and
filthiness, when he besides adorned the same place with a cloister of
the same length.

12. It is true, a man may say, these were favors peculiar to those
particular places on which he bestowed his benefits; but then what
favors he bestowed on the Eleans was a donation not only in common to
all Greece, but to all the habitable earth, as far as the glory of the
Olympic games reached. For when he perceived that they were come to
nothing, for want of money, and that the only remains of ancient Greece
were in a manner gone, he not only became one of the combatants in that
return of the fifth-year games, which in his sailing to Rome he happened
to be present at, but he settled upon them revenues of money for
perpetuity, insomuch that his memorial as a combatant there can never
fail. It would be an infinite task if I should go over his payments
of people's debts, or tributes, for them, as he eased the people of
Phasaelis, of Batanea, and of the small cities about Cilicia, of those
annual pensions they before paid. However, the fear he was in much
disturbed the greatness of his soul, lest he should be exposed to envy,
or seem to hunt after greater filings than he ought, while he bestowed
more liberal gifts upon these cities than did their owners themselves.

13. Now Herod had a body suited to his soul, and was ever a most
excellent hunter, where he generally had good success, by the means of
his great skill in riding horses; for in one day he caught forty wild
beasts: 36 that country breeds also bears, and the greatest part of it
is replenished with stags and wild asses. He was also such a warrior as
could not be withstood: many men, therefore, there are who have stood
amazed at his readiness in his exercises, when they saw him throw the
javelin directly forward, and shoot the arrow upon the mark. And then,
besides these performances of his depending on his own strength of mind
and body, fortune was also very favorable to him; for he seldom failed
of success in his wars; and when he failed, he was not himself the
occasion of such failings, but he either was betrayed by some, or the
rashness of his own soldiers procured his defeat.






CHAPTER 22.


     The Murder Of Aristobulus And Hyrcanus, The High Priests, As
     Also Of Mariamne The Queen.

1. However, fortune was avenged on Herod in his external great
successes, by raising him up domestical troubles; and he began to have
wild disorders in his family, on account of his wife, of whom he was so
very fond. For when he came to the government, he sent away her whom
he had before married when he was a private person, and who was born at
Jerusalem, whose name was Doris, and married Mariamne, the daughter of
Alexander, the son of Aristobulus; on whose account disturbances arose
in his family, and that in part very soon, but chiefly after his return
from Rome. For, first of all, he expelled Antipater the son of Doris,
for the sake of his sons by Mariamne, out of the city, and permitted him
to come thither at no other times than at the festivals. After this
he slew his wife's grandfather, Hyrcanus, when he was returned out of
Parthin to him, under this pretense, that he suspected him of plotting
against him. Now this Hyrcanus had been carried captive to Barzapharnes,
when he overran Syria; but those of his own country beyond Euphrates
were desirous he would stay with them, and this out of the commiseration
they had for his condition; and had he complied with their desires,
when they exhorted him not to go over the river to Herod, he had not
perished: but the marriage of his granddaughter [to Herod] was his
temptation; for as he relied upon him, and was over-fond of his own
country, he came back to it. Herod's provocation was this,--not that
Hyrcanus made any attempt to gain the kingdom, but that it was fitter
for him to be their king than for Herod.

2. Now of the five children which Herod had by Mariamne, two of them
were daughters, and three were sons; and the youngest of these sons was
educated at Rome, and there died; but the two eldest he treated as those
of royal blood, on account of the nobility of their mother, and because
they were not born till he was king. But then what was stronger than all
this was the love that he bare to Mariamne, and which inflamed him every
day to a great degree, and so far conspired with the other motives, that
he felt no other troubles, on account of her he loved so entirely. But
Mariamne's hatred to him was not inferior to his love to her. She had
indeed but too just a cause of indignation from what he had done,
while her boldness proceeded from his affection to her; so she openly
reproached him with what he had done to her grandfather Hyrcanus, and to
her brother Aristobulus; for he had not spared this Aristobulus, though
he were but a child; for when he had given him the high priesthood at
the age of seventeen, he slew him quickly after he had conferred that
dignity upon him; but when Aristobulus had put on the holy vestments,
and had approached to the altar at a festival, the multitude, in great
crowds, fell into tears; whereupon the child was sent by night to
Jericho, and was there dipped by the Galls, at Herod's command, in a
pool till he was drowned.

3. For these reasons Mariamne reproached Herod, and his sister and
mother, after a most contumelious manner, while he was dumb on account
of his affection for her; yet had the women great indignation at her,
and raised a calumny against her, that she was false to his bed;
which thing they thought most likely to move Herod to anger. They also
contrived to have many other circumstances believed, in order to make
the thing more credible, and accused her of having sent her picture into
Egypt to Antony, and that her lust was so extravagant, as to have thus
showed herself, though she was absent, to a man that ran mad after
women, and to a man that had it in his power to use violence to her.
This charge fell like a thunderbolt upon Herod, and put him into
disorder; and that especially, because his love to her occasioned him to
be jealous, and because he considered with himself that Cleopatra was a
shrewd woman, and that on her account Lysanias the king was taken off,
as well as Malichus the Arabian; for his fear did not only extend to the
dissolving of his marriage, but to the danger of his life.

4. When therefore he was about to take a journey abroad, he committed
his wife to Joseph, his sister Salome's husband, as to one who would be
faithful to him, and bare him good-will on account of their kindred; he
also gave him a secret injunction, that if Antony slew him, he should
slay her. But Joseph, without any ill design, and only in order to
demonstrate the king's love to his wife, how he could not bear to think
of being separated from her, even by death itself, discovered this grand
secret to her; upon which, when Herod was come back, and as they talked
together, and he confirmed his love to her by many oaths, and assured
her that he had never such an affection for any other woman as he had
for her--"Yes," says she, "thou didst, to be sure, demonstrate thy love
to me by the injunctions thou gavest Joseph, when thou commandedst him
to kill me." 37

5. When he heard that this grand secret was discovered, he was like a
distracted man, and said that Joseph would never have disclosed that
injunction of his, unless he had debauched her. His passion also made
him stark mad, and leaping out of his bed, he ran about the palace after
a wild manner; at which time his sister Salome took the opportunity
also to blast her reputation, and confirmed his suspicion about Joseph;
whereupon, out of his ungovernable jealousy and rage, he commanded both
of them to be slain immediately; but as soon as ever his passion was
over, he repented of what he had done, and as soon as his anger was
worn off, his affections were kindled again. And indeed the flame of his
desires for her was so ardent, that he could not think she was dead, but
would appear, under his disorders, to speak to her as if she were
still alive, till he were better instructed by time, when his grief and
trouble, now she was dead, appeared as great as his affection had been
for her while she was living.






CHAPTER 23.


     Calumnies Against The Sons Of Mariamne. Antipateris
     Preferred Before Them. They Are Accused Before Caesar, And
     Herod Is Reconciled To Them.

1. Now Mariamne's sons were heirs to that hatred which had been borne
their mother; and when they considered the greatness of Herod's crime
towards her, they were suspicious of him as of an enemy of theirs; and
this first while they were educated at Rome, but still more when they
were returned to Judea. This temper of theirs increased upon them
as they grew up to be men; and when they were Come to an age fit for
marriage, the one of them married their aunt Salome's daughter, which
Salome had been the accuser of their mother; the other married the
daughter of Archelaus, king of Cappadocia. And now they used boldness
in speaking, as well as bore hatred in their minds. Now those that
calumniated them took a handle from such their boldness, and certain
of them spake now more plainly to the king that there were treacherous
designs laid against him by both his sons; and he that was son-in-law to
Archelaus, relying upon his father-in-law, was preparing to fly away, in
order to accuse Herod before Caesar; and when Herod's head had been long
enough filled with these calumnies, he brought Antipater, whom he had by
Doris, into favor again, as a defense to him against his other sons, and
began all the ways he possibly could to prefer him before them.

2. But these sons were not able to bear this change in their affairs;
but when they saw him that was born of a mother of no family, the
nobility of their birth made them unable to contain their indignation;
but whensoever they were uneasy, they showed the anger they had at
it. And as these sons did day after day improve in that their anger,
Antipater already exercised all his own abilities, which were very
great, in flattering his father, and in contriving many sorts of
calumnies against his brethren, while he told some stories of them
himself, and put it upon other proper persons to raise other stories
against them, till at length he entirely cut his brethren off from all
hopes of succeeding to the kingdom; for he was already publicly put into
his father's will as his successor. Accordingly, he was sent with royal
ornaments, and other marks of royalty, to Caesar, excepting the diadem.
He was also able in time to introduce his mother again into Mariamne's
bed. The two sorts of weapons he made use of against his brethren were
flattery and calumny, whereby he brought matters privately to such a
pass, that the king had thoughts of putting his sons to death.

3. So the father drew Alexander as far as Rome, and charged him with an
attempt of poisoning him before Caesar. Alexander could hardly speak for
lamentation; but having a judge that was more skillful than Antipater,
and more wise than Herod, he modestly avoided laying any imputation upon
his father, but with great strength of reason confuted the calumnies
laid against him; and when he had demonstrated the innocency of his
brother, who was in the like danger with himself, he at last bewailed
the craftiness of Antipater, and the disgrace they were under. He was
enabled also to justify himself, not only by a clear conscience, which
he carried within him, but by his eloquence; for he was a shrewd man
in making speeches. And upon his saying at last, that if his father
objected this crime to them, it was in his power to put them to death,
he made all the audience weep; and he brought Caesar to that pass, as
to reject the accusations, and to reconcile their father to them
immediately. But the conditions of this reconciliation were these,
that they should in all things be obedient to their father, and that he
should have power to leave the kingdom to which of them he pleased.

4. After this the king came back from Rome, and seemed to have forgiven
his sons upon these accusations; but still so that he was not without
his suspicions of them. They were followed by Antipater, who was the
fountain-head of those accusations; yet did not he openly discover his
hatred to them, as revering him that had reconciled them. But as Herod
sailed by Cilicia, he touched at Eleusa, 38 where Archelaus treated them
in the most obliging manner, and gave him thanks for the deliverance of
his son-in-law, and was much pleased at their reconciliation; and this
the more, because he had formerly written to his friends at Rome that
they should be assisting to Alexander at his trial. So he conducted
Herod as far as Zephyrium, and made him presents to the value of thirty
talents.

5. Now when Herod was come to Jerusalem, he gathered the people
together, and presented to them his three sons, and gave them an
apologetic account of his absence, and thanked God greatly, and
thanked Caesar greatly also, for settling his house when it was under
disturbances, and had procured concord among his sons, which was of
greater consequence than the kingdom itself,--"and which I will render
still more firm; for Caesar hath put into my power to dispose of the
government, and to appoint my successor. Accordingly, in way of requital
for his kindness, and in order to provide for mine own advantage, I do
declare that these three sons of mine shall be kings. And, in the first
place, I pray for the approbation of God to what I am about; and, in the
next place, I desire your approbation also. The age of one of them, and
the nobility of the other two, shall procure them the succession. Nay,
indeed, my kingdom is so large that it may be sufficient for more kings.
Now do you keep those in their places whom Caesar hath joined, and their
father hath appointed; and do not you pay undue or unequal respects to
them, but to every one according to the prerogative of their births;
for he that pays such respects unduly, will thereby not make him that is
honored beyond what his age requires so joyful, as he will make him
that is dishonored sorrowful. As for the kindred and friends that are
to converse with them, I will appoint them to each of them, and will so
constitute them, that they may be securities for their concord; as
well knowing that the ill tempers of those with whom they converse will
produce quarrels and contentions among them; but that if these with
whom they converse be of good tempers, they will preserve their natural
affections for one another. But still I desire that not these only, but
all the captains of my army, have for the present their hopes placed on
me alone; for I do not give away my kingdom to these my sons, but give
them royal honors only; whereby it will come to pass that they will
enjoy the sweet parts of government as rulers themselves, but that the
burden of administration will rest upon myself whether I will or not.
And let every one consider what age I am of, how I have conducted my
life, and what piety I have exercised; for my age is not so great that
men may soon expect the end of my life; nor have I indulged such a
luxurious way of living as cuts men off when they are young; and we
have been so religious towards God, that we [have reason to hope we] may
arrive at a very great age. But for such as cultivate a friendship with
my sons, so as to aim at my destruction, they shall be punished by me
on their account. I am not one who envy my own children, and therefore
forbid men to pay them great respect; but I know that such [extravagant]
respects are the way to make them insolent. And if every one that comes
near them does but revolve this in his mind, that if he prove a good
man, he shall receive a reward from me, but that if he prove seditious,
his ill-intended complaisance shall get him nothing from him to whom it
is shown, I suppose they will all be of my side, that is, of my sons'
side; for it will be for their advantage that I reign, and that I be
at concord with them. But do you, O my good children, reflect upon
the holiness of nature itself, by whose means natural affection is
preserved, even among wild beasts; in the next place, reflect upon
Caesar, who hath made this reconciliation among us; and in the third
place, reflect upon me, who entreat you to do what I have power to
command you,--continue brethren. I give you royal garments, and royal
honors; and I pray to God to preserve what I have determined, in case
you be at concord one with another." When the king had thus spoken, and
had saluted every one of his sons after an obliging manner, he dismissed
the multitude; some of which gave their assent to what he had said, and
wished it might take effect accordingly; but for those who wished for a
change of affairs, they pretended they did not so much as hear what he
said.






CHAPTER 24.


     The Malice Of Antipater And Doris. Alexander Is Very Uneasy
     On Glaphyras Account. Herod Pardons Pheroras, Whom He
     Suspected, And Salome Whom He Knew To Make Mischief Among
     Them. Herod's Eunuchs Are Tortured And Alexander Is Bound.

1. But now the quarrel that was between them still accompanied these
brethren when they parted, and the suspicions they had one of the
other grew worse. Alexander and Aristobulus were much grieved that the
privilege of the first-born was confirmed to Antipater; as was Antipater
very angry at his brethren that they were to succeed him. But then this
last being of a disposition that was mutable and politic, he knew how to
hold his tongue, and used a great deal of cunning, and thereby concealed
the hatred he bore to them; while the former, depending on the nobility
of their births, had every thing upon their tongues which was in their
minds. Many also there were who provoked them further, and many of their
[seeming] friends insinuated themselves into their acquaintance, to
spy out what they did. Now every thing that was said by Alexander was
presently brought to Antipater, and from Antipater it was brought to
Herod with additions. Nor could the young man say any thing in the
simplicity of his heart, without giving offense, but what he said was
still turned to calumny against him. And if he had been at any time a
little free in his conversation, great imputations were forged from
the smallest occasions. Antipater also was perpetually setting some to
provoke him to speak, that the lies he raised of him might seem to have
some foundation of truth; and if, among the many stories that were given
out, but one of them could be proved true, that was supposed to imply
the rest to be true also. And as to Antipater's friends, they were all
either naturally so cautious in speaking, or had been so far bribed to
conceal their thoughts, that nothing of these grand secrets got abroad
by their means. Nor should one be mistaken if he called the life of
Antipater a mystery of wickedness; for he either corrupted Alexander's
acquaintance with money, or got into their favor by flatteries; by which
two means he gained all his designs, and brought them to betray their
master, and to steal away, and reveal what he either did or said. Thus
did he act a part very cunningly in all points, and wrought himself a
passage by his calumnies with the greatest shrewdness; while he put on
a face as if he were a kind brother to Alexander and Aristobulus, but
suborned other men to inform of what they did to Herod. And when any
thing was told against Alexander, he would come in, and pretend [to be
of his side], and would begin to contradict what was said; but would
afterward contrive matters so privately, that the king should have an
indignation at him. His general aim was this,--to lay a plot, and to
make it believed that Alexander lay in wait to kill his father; for
nothing afforded so great a confirmation to these calumnies as did
Antipater's apologies for him.

2. By these methods Herod was inflamed, and as much as his natural
affection to the young men did every day diminish, so much did it
increase towards Antipater. The courtiers also inclined to the same
conduct, some of their own accord, and others by the king's injunction,
as particularly did Ptolemy, the king's dearest friend, as also the
king's brethren, and all his children; for Antipater was all in all; and
what was the bitterest part of all to Alexander, Antipater's mother was
also all in all; she was one that gave counsel against them, and was
more harsh than a step-mother, and one that hated the queen's sons more
than is usual to hate sons-in-law. All men did therefore already pay
their respects to Antipater, in hopes of advantage; and it was the
king's command which alienated every body [from the brethren], he having
given this charge to his most intimate friends, that they should not
come near, nor pay any regard, to Alexander, or to his friends. Herod
was also become terrible, not only to his domestics about the court, but
to his friends abroad; for Caesar had given such a privilege to no other
king as he had given to him, which was this,--that he might fetch back
any one that fled from him, even out of a city that was not under
his own jurisdiction. Now the young men were not acquainted with the
calumnies raised against them; for which reason they could not guard
themselves against them, but fell under them; for their father did not
make any public complaints against either of them; though in a little
time they perceived how things were by his coldness to them, and by the
great uneasiness he showed upon any thing that troubled him. Antipater
had also made their uncle Pheroras to be their enemy, as well as their
aunt Salome, while he was always talking with her, as with a wife,
and irritating her against them. Moreover, Alexander's wife, Glaphyra,
augmented this hatred against them, by deriving her nobility and
genealogy [from great persons], and pretending that she was a lady
superior to all others in that kingdom, as being derived by her father's
side from Temenus, and by her mother's side from Darius, the son of
Hystaspes. She also frequently reproached Herod's sister and wives with
the ignobility of their descent; and that they were every one chosen by
him for their beauty, but not for their family. Now those wives of his
were not a few; it being of old permitted to the Jews to marry many
wives, 39 and this king delighting in many; all which hated Alexander,
on account of Glaphyra's boasting and reproaches.

3. Nay, Aristobulus had raised a quarrel between himself and Salome, who
was his mother-in-law, besides the anger he had conceived at Glaphyra's
reproaches; for he perpetually upbraided his wife with the meanness
of her family, and complained, that as he had married a woman of a low
family, so had his brother Alexander married one of royal blood. At
this Salome's daughter wept, and told it her with this addition, that
Alexander threatened the mothers of his other brethren, that when he
should come to the crown, he would make them weave with their maidens,
and would make those brothers of his country schoolmasters; and brake
this jest upon them, that they had been very carefully instructed, to
fit them for such an employment. Hereupon Salome could not contain her
anger, but told all to Herod; nor could her testimony be suspected,
since it was against her own son-in-law There was also another calumny
that ran abroad and inflamed the king's mind; for he heard that these
sons of his were perpetually speaking of their mother, and, among their
lamentations for her, did not abstain from cursing him; and that when
he made presents of any of Mariamne's garments to his later wives, these
threatened that in a little time, instead of royal garments, they would
clothe theft in no better than hair-cloth.

4. Now upon these accounts, though Herod was somewhat afraid of the
young men's high spirit, yet did he not despair of reducing them to a
better mind; but before he went to Rome, whither he was now going by
sea, he called them to him, and partly threatened them a little, as a
king; but for the main, he admonished them as a father, and exhorted
them to love their brethren, and told them that he would pardon their
former offenses, if they would amend for the time to come. But they
refuted the calumnies that had been raised of them, and said they
were false, and alleged that their actions were sufficient for their
vindication; and said withal, that he himself ought to shut his ears
against such tales, and not be too easy in believing them, for that
there would never be wanting those that would tell lies to their
disadvantage, as long as any would give ear to them.

5. When they had thus soon pacified him, as being their father, they got
clear of the present fear they were in. Yet did they see occasion for
sorrow in some time afterward; for they knew that Salome, as well as
their uncle Pheroras, were their enemies; who were both of them heavy
and severe persons, and especially Pheroras, who was a partner with
Herod in all the affairs of the kingdom, excepting his diadem. He had
also a hundred talents of his own revenue, and enjoyed the advantage
of all the land beyond Jordan, which he had received as a gift from his
brother, who had asked of Caesar to make him a tetrarch, as he was made
accordingly. Herod had also given him a wife out of the royal family,
who was no other than his own wife's sister, and after her death had
solemnly espoused to him his own eldest daughter, with a dowry of three
hundred talents; but Pheroras refused to consummate this royal marriage,
out of his affection to a maidservant of his. Upon which account Herod
was very angry, and gave that daughter in marriage to a brother's son
of his, [Joseph,] who was slain afterward by the Parthians; but in some
time he laid aside his anger against Pheroras, and pardoned him, as one
not able to overcome his foolish passion for the maid-servant.

6. Nay, Pheroras had been accused long before, while the queen
[Mariamne] was alive, as if he were in a plot to poison Herod; and there
came then so great a number of informers, that Herod himself, though he
was an exceeding lover of his brethren, was brought to believe what was
said, and to be afraid of it also. And when he had brought many of those
that were under suspicion to the torture, he came at last to Pheroras's
own friends; none of which did openly confess the crime, but they owned
that he had made preparation to take her whom he loved, and run away to
the Parthians. Costobarus also, the husband of Salome, to whom the king
had given her in marriage, after her former husband had been put to
death for adultery, was instrumental in bringing about this contrivance
and flight of his. Nor did Salome escape all calumny upon herself; for
her brother Pheroras accused her that she had made an agreement to marry
Silleus, the procurator of Obodas, king of Arabia, who was at bitter
enmity with Herod; but when she was convicted of this, and of all that
Pheroras had accused her of, she obtained her pardon. The king also
pardoned Pheroras himself the crimes he had been accused of.

7. But the storm of the whole family was removed to Alexander, and all
of it rested upon his head. There were three eunuchs who were in the
highest esteem with the king, as was plain by the offices they were in
about him; for one of them was appointed to be his butler, another of
them got his supper ready for him, and the third put him into bed, and
lay down by him. Now Alexander had prevailed with these men, by large
gifts, to let him use them after an obscene manner; which, when it was
told to the king, they were tortured, and found guilty, and presently
confessed the criminal conversation he had with them. They also
discovered the promises by which they were induced so to do, and how
they were deluded by Alexander, who had told them that they ought not to
fix their hopes upon Herod, an old man, and one so shameless as to color
his hair, unless they thought that would make him young again; but that
they ought to fix their attention to him who was to be his successor
in the kingdom, whether he would or not; and who in no long time would
avenge himself on his enemies, and make his friends happy and blessed,
and themselves in the first place; that the men of power did already pay
respects to Alexander privately, and that the captains of the soldiery,
and the officers, did secretly come to him.

8. These confessions did so terrify Herod, that he durst not immediately
publish them; but he sent spies abroad privately, by night and by day,
who should make a close inquiry after all that was done and said; and
when any were but suspected [of treason], he put them to death, insomuch
that the palace was full of horribly unjust proceedings; for every body
forged calumnies, as they were themselves in a state of enmity or hatred
against others; and many there were who abused the king's bloody passion
to the disadvantage of those with whom they had quarrels, and lies
were easily believed, and punishments were inflicted sooner than the
calumnies were forged. He who had just then been accusing another was
accused himself, and was led away to execution together with him whom
he had convicted; for the danger the king was in of his life made
examinations be very short. He also proceeded to such a degree of
bitterness, that he could not look on any of those that were not accused
with a pleasant countenance, but was in the most barbarous disposition
towards his own friends. Accordingly, he forbade a great many of them to
come to court, and to those whom he had not power to punish actually
he spake harshly. But for Antipater, he insulted Alexander, now he was
under his misfortunes, and got a stout company of his kindred together,
and raised all sorts of calumny against him; and for the king, he was
brought to such a degree of terror by those prodigious slanders and
contrivances, that he fancied he saw Alexander coming to him with a
drawn sword in his hand. So he caused him to be seized upon immediately,
and bound, and fell to examining his friends by torture, many of whom
died [under the torture], but would discover nothing, nor say any thing
against their consciences; but some of them, being forced to speak
falsely by the pains they endured, said that Alexander, and his brother
Aristobulus, plotted against him, and waited for an opportunity to kill
him as he was hunting, and then fly away to Rome. These accusations
though they were of an incredible nature, and only framed upon the great
distress they were in, were readily believed by the king, who thought it
some comfort to him, after he had bound his son, that it might appear he
had not done it unjustly.






CHAPTER 25.


     Archelaus Procures A Reconciliation Between Alexander
     Pheroras, And Herod.

1. Now as to Alexander, since he perceived it impossible to persuade his
father [that he was innocent], he resolved to meet his calamities, how
severe soever they were; so he composed four books against his enemies,
and confessed that he had been in a plot; but declared withal that the
greatest part [of the courtiers] were in a plot with him, and chiefly
Pheroras and Salome; nay, that Salome once came and forced him to lie
with her in the night time, whether he would or no. These books were put
into Herod's hands, and made a great clamor against the men in power.
And now it was that Archelaus came hastily into Judea, as being
affrighted for his son-in-law and his daughter; and he came as a proper
assistant, and in a very prudent manner, and by a stratagem he obliged
the king not to execute what he had threatened; for when he was come to
him, he cried out, "Where in the world is this wretched son-in-law of
mine? Where shall I see the head of him which contrived to murder his
father, which I will tear to pieces with my own hands? I will do the
same also to my daughter, who hath such a fine husband; for although she
be not a partner in the plot, yet, by being the wife of such a creature,
she is polluted. And I cannot but admire at thy patience, against whom
this plot is laid, if Alexander be still alive; for as I came with what
haste I could from Cappadocia, I expected to find him put to death for
his crimes long ago; but still, in order to make an examination with
thee about my daughter, whom, out of regard to thee and by dignity, I
had espoused to him in marriage; but now we must take counsel about them
both; and if thy paternal affection be so great, that thou canst not
punish thy son, who hath plotted against thee, let us change our right
hands, and let us succeed one to the other in expressing our rage upon
this occasion."

2. When he had made this pompous declaration, he got Herod to remit of
his anger, though he were in disorder, who thereupon gave him the books
which Alexander had composed to be read by him; and as he came to every
head, he considered of it, together with Herod. So Archelaus took hence
the occasion for that stratagem which he made use of, and by degrees
he laid the blame on those men whose names were in these books, and
especially upon Pheroras; and when he saw that the king believed him [to
be in earnest], he said, "We must consider whether the young man be not
himself plotted against by such a number of wicked wretches, and not
thou plotted against by the young man; for I cannot see any occasion for
his falling into so horrid a crime, since he enjoys the advantages of
royalty already, and has the expectation of being one of thy successors;
I mean this, unless there were some persons that persuade him to it, and
such persons as make an ill use of the facility they know there is
to persuade young men; for by such persons, not only young men are
sometimes imposed upon, but old men also, and by them sometimes are the
most illustrious families and kingdoms overturned."

3. Herod assented to what he had said, and, by degrees, abated of
his anger against Alexander, but was more angry at Pheroras; for the
principal subject of the four books was Pheroras; who perceiving that
the king's inclinations changed on a sudden, and that Archelaus's
friendship could do every thing with him, and that he had no honorable
method of preserving himself, he procured his safety by his impudence.
So he left Alexander, and had recourse to Archelaus, who told him that
he did not see how he could get him excused, now he was directly caught
in so many crimes, whereby it was evidently demonstrated that he had
plotted against the king, and had been the cause of those misfortunes
which the young man was now under, unless he would moreover leave off
his cunning knavery, and his denials of what he was charged withal, and
confess the charge, and implore pardon of his brother, who still had a
kindness for him; but that if he would do so, he would afford him all
the assistance he was able.

4. With this advice Pheroras complied, and putting himself into such a
habit as might most move compassion, he came with black cloth upon his
body, and tears in his eyes, and threw himself down at Herod's feet, and
begged his pardon for what he had done, and confessed that he had acted
very wickedly, and was guilty of every thing that he had been accused
of, and lamented that disorder of his mind, and distraction which his
love to a woman, he said, had brought him to. So when Archelaus had
brought Pheroras to accuse and bear witness against himself, he then
made an excuse for him, and mitigated Herod's anger towards him, and
this by using certain domestical examples; for that when he had suffered
much greater mischiefs from a brother of his own, he prefered the
obligations of nature before the passion of revenge; because it is in
kingdoms as it is in gross bodies, where some member or other is ever
swelled by the body's weight, in which case it is not proper to cut off
such member, but to heal it by a gentle method of cure.

5. Upon Arehelaus's saying this, and much more to the same purpose,
Herod's displeasure against Pheroras was mollified; yet did he persevere
in his own indignation against Alexander, and said he would have his
daughter divorced, and taken away from him, and this till he had brought
Herod to that pass, that, contrary to his former behavior to him,
he petitioned Archelaus for the young man, and that he would let his
daughter continue espoused to him: but Archelaus made him strongly
believe that he would permit her to be married to any one else, but not
to Alexander, because he looked upon it as a very valuable advantage,
that the relation they had contracted by that affinity, and the
privileges that went along with it, might be preserved. And when the
king said that his son would take it for a great favor to him, if he
would not dissolve that marriage, especially since they had already
children between the young man and her, and since that wife of his was
so well beloved by him, and that as while she remains his wife she would
be a great preservative to him, and keep him from offending, as he had
formerly done; so if she should be once torn away from him, she would be
the cause of his falling into despair, because such young men's attempts
are best mollified when they are diverted from them by settling their
affections at home. So Arehelaus complied with what Herod desired, but
not without difficulty, and was both himself reconciled to the young
man, and reconciled his father to him also. However, he said he must,
by all means, be sent to Rome to discourse with Caesar, because he had
already written a full account to him of this whole matter.

6. Thus a period was put to Archelaus's stratagem, whereby he
delivered his son-in-law out of the dangers he was in; but when these
reconciliations were over, they spent their time in feastings and
agreeable entertainments. And when Archelaus was going away, Herod made
him a present of seventy talents, with a golden throne set with precious
stones, and some eunuchs, and a concubine who was called Pannychis.
He also paid due honors to every one of his friends according to their
dignity. In like manner did all the king's kindred, by his command, make
glorious presents to Archelaus; and so he was conducted on his way by
Herod and his nobility as far as Antioch.






CHAPTER 26.


     How Eurycles <a href="#linknote-40" name="linknoteref-40"
      id="linknoteref-40">40</a> Calumniated The Sons Of Mariamne; And How
     Euaratus Of Cos's Apology For Them Had No Effect.

1. Now a little afterward there came into Judea a man that was much
superior to Arehelaus's stratagems, who did not only overturn that
reconciliation that had been so wisely made with Alexander, but proved
the occasion of his ruin. He was a Lacedemonian, and his name was
Eurycles. He was so corrupt a man, that out of the desire of getting
money, he chose to live under a king, for Greece could not suffice his
luxury. He presented Herod with splendid gifts, as a bait which he
laid in order to compass his ends, and quickly received them back again
manifold; yet did he esteem bare gifts as nothing, unless he imbrued the
kingdom in blood by his purchases. Accordingly, he imposed upon the king
by flattering him, and by talking subtlely to him, as also by the lying
encomiums which he made upon him; for as he soon perceived Herod's blind
side, so he said and did every thing that might please him, and thereby
became one of his most intimate friends; for both the king and all that
were about him had a great regard for this Spartan, on account of his
country. 41

2. Now as soon as this fellow perceived the rotten parts of the family,
and what quarrels the brothers had one with another, and in what
disposition the father was towards each of them, he chose to take his
lodging at the first in the house of Antipater, but deluded Alexander
with a pretense of friendship to him, and falsely claimed to be an old
acquaintance of Archelaus; for which reason he was presently admitted
into Alexander's familiarity as a faithful friend. He also soon
recommended himself to his brother Aristobulus. And when he had thus
made trial of these several persons, he imposed upon one of them by one
method, and upon another by another. But he was principally hired by
Antipater, and so betrayed Alexander, and this by reproaching Antipater,
because, while he was the eldest son he overlooked the intrigues of
those who stood in the way of his expectations; and by reproaching
Alexander, because he who was born of a queen, and was married to a
king's daughter, permitted one that was born of a mean woman to lay
claim to the succession, and this when he had Archelaus to support him
in the most complete manner. Nor was his advice thought to be other
than faithful by the young man, because of his pretended friendship
with Archelaus; on which account it was that Alexander lamented to him
Antipater's behavior with regard to himself, and this without concealing
any thing from him; and how it was no wonder if Herod, after he had
killed their mother, should deprive them of her kingdom. Upon this
Eurycles pretended to commiserate his condition, and to grieve with him.
He also, by a bait that he laid for him, procured Aristobulus to say the
same things. Thus did he inveigle both the brothers to make complaints
of their father, and then went to Antipater, and carried these grand
secrets to him. He also added a fiction of his own, as if his brothers
had laid a plot against him, and were almost ready to come upon him with
their drawn swords. For this intelligence he received a great sum of
money, and on that account he commended Antipater before his father, and
at length undertook the work of bringing Alexander and Aristobulus to
their graves, and accused them before their father. So he came to Herod,
and told him that he would save his life, as a requital for the favors
he had received from him, and would preserve his light [of life] by way
of retribution for his kind entertainment; for that a sword had been
long whetted, and Alexander's right hand had been long stretched out
against him; but that he had laid impediments in his way, prevented his
speed, and that by pretending to assist him in his design: how Alexander
said that Herod was not contented to reign in a kingdom that belonged to
others, and to make dilapidations in their mother's government after
he had killed her; but besides all this, that he introduced a spurious
successor, and proposed to give the kingdom of their ancestors to that
pestilent fellow Antipater:--that he would now appease the ghosts of
Hyrcanus and Mariamne, by taking vengeance on him; for that it was not
fit for him to take the succession to the government from such a father
without bloodshed: that many things happen every day to provoke him so
to do, insomuch that he can say nothing at all, but it affords occasion
for calumny against him; for that if any mention be made of nobility
of birth, even in other cases, he is abused unjustly, while his father
would say that nobody, to be sure, is of noble birth but Alexander, and
that his father was inglorious for want of such nobility. If they be
at any time hunting, and he says nothing, he gives offense; and if he
commends any body, they take it in way of jest. That they always find
their father unmercifully severe, and have no natural affection for
any of them but for Antipater; on which accounts, if this plot does not
take, he is very willing to die; but that in case he kill his father, he
hath sufficient opportunities for saving himself. In the first place, he
hath Archelaus his father-in-law to whom he can easily fly; and in the
next place, he hath Caesar, who had never known Herod's character to
this day; for that he shall not appear then before him with that dread
he used to do when his father was there to terrify him; and that he
will not then produce the accusations that concerned himself alone,
but would, in the first place, openly insist on the calamities of their
nation, and how they are taxed to death, and in what ways of luxury and
wicked practices that wealth is spent which was gotten by bloodshed;
what sort of persons they are that get our riches, and to whom those
cities belong upon whom he bestows his favors; that he would have
inquiry made what became of his grandfather [Hyrcanus], and his mother
[Mariamne], and would openly proclaim the gross wickedness that was in
the kingdom; on which accounts he should not be deemed a parricide.

3. When Eurycles had made this portentous speech, he greatly commended
Antipater, as the only child that had an affection for his father,
and on that account was an impediment to the other's plot against him.
Hereupon the king, who had hardly repressed his anger upon the former
accusations, was exasperated to an incurable degree. At which time
Antipater took another occasion to send in other persons to his
father to accuse his brethren, and to tell him that they had privately
discoursed with Jucundus and Tyrannus, who had once been masters of
the horse to the king, but for some offenses had been put out of
that honorable employment. Herod was in a very great rage at these
informations, and presently ordered those men to be tortured; yet did
not they confess any thing of what the king had been informed; but a
certain letter was produced, as written by Alexander to the governor of
a castle, to desire him to receive him and Aristobulus into the castle
when he had killed his father, and to give them weapons, and what other
assistance he could, upon that occasion. Alexander said that this letter
was a forgery of Diophantus. This Diophantus was the king's secretary, a
bold man, and cunning in counterfeiting any one's hand; and after he had
counterfeited a great number, he was at last put to death for it.
Herod did also order the governor of the castle to be tortured, but got
nothing out of him of what the accusations suggested.

4. However, although Herod found the proofs too weak, he gave order to
have his sons kept in custody; for till now they had been at liberty.
He also called that pest of his family, and forger of all this vile
accusation, Eurycles, his savior and benefactor, and gave him a reward
of fifty talents. Upon which he prevented any accurate accounts that
could come of what he had done, by going immediately into Cappadocia,
and there he got money of Archelaus, having the impudence to pretend
that he had reconciled Herod to Alexander. He thence passed over into
Greece, and used what he had thus wickedly gotten to the like wicked
purposes. Accordingly, he was twice accused before Caesar, that he had
filled Achaia with sedition, and had plundered its cities; and so he was
sent into banishment. And thus was he punished for what wicked actions
he had been guilty of about Aristobulus and Alexander.

5. But it will now be worth while to put Euaratus of Cos in opposition
to this Spartan; for as he was one of Alexander's most intimate friends,
and came to him in his travels at the same time that Eurycles came;
so the king put the question to him, whether those things of which
Alexander was accused were true? He assured him upon oath that he had
never heard any such things from the young men; yet did this testimony
avail nothing for the clearing those miserable creatures; for Herod was
only disposed and most ready to hearken to what made against them, and
every one was most agreeable to him that would believe they were guilty,
and showed their indignation at them.






CHAPTER 27.


     Herod By Caesars Direction Accuses His Sons At Eurytus. They
     Are Not Produced Before The Courts But Yet Are Condemned;
     And In A Little Time They Are Sent To Sebaste, And Strangled
     There.

1. Moreover, Salome exasperated Herod's cruelty against his sons; for
Aristobulus was desirous to bring her, who was his mother-in-law and his
aunt, into the like dangers with themselves; so he sent to her to take
care of her own safety, and told her that the king was preparing to put
her to death, on account of the accusation that was laid against her, as
if when she formerly endeavored to marry herself to Sylleus the Arabian,
she had discovered the king's grand secrets to him, who was the king's
enemy; and this it was that came as the last storm, and entirely sunk
the young men when they were in great danger before. For Salome came
running to the king, and informed him of what admonition had been given
her; whereupon he could bear no longer, but commanded both the young
men to be bound, and kept the one asunder from the other. He also sent
Volumnius, the general of his army, to Caesar immediately, as also his
friend Olympus with him, who carried the informations in writing along
with them. Now as soon as they had sailed to Rome, and delivered the
king's letters to Caesar, Caesar was mightily troubled at the case of
the young men; yet did not he think he ought to take the power from the
father of condemning his sons; so he wrote back to him, and appointed
him to have the power over his sons; but said withal, that he would do
well to make an examination into this matter of the plot against him in
a public court, and to take for his assessors his own kindred, and the
governors of the province. And if those sons be found guilty, to put
them to death; but if they appear to have thought of no more than flying
away from him, that he should moderate their punishment.

2. With these directions Herod complied, and came to Berytus, where
Caesar had ordered the court to be assembled, and got the judicature
together. The presidents sat first, as Caesar's letters had appointed,
who were Saturninus and Pedanius, and their lieutenants that were with
them, with whom was the procurator Volumnius also; next to them sat the
king's kinsmen and friends, with Salome also, and Pheroras; after whom
sat the principal men of all Syria, excepting Archelaus; for Herod had a
suspicion of him, because he was Alexander's father-in-law. Yet did not
he produce his sons in open court; and this was done very cunningly,
for he knew well enough that had they but appeared only, they would
certainly have been pitied; and if withal they had been suffered to
speak, Alexander would easily have answered what they were accused of;
but they were in custody at Platane, a village of the Sidontans.

3. So the king got up, and inveighed against his sons, as if they were
present; and as for that part of the accusation that they had plotted
against him, he urged it but faintly, because he was destitute of
proofs; but he insisted before the assessors on the reproaches, and
jests, and injurious carriage, and ten thousand the like offenses
against him, which were heavier than death itself; and when nobody
contradicted him, he moved them to pity his case, as though he had been
condemned himself, now he had gained a bitter victory against his sons.
So he asked every one's sentence, which sentence was first of all given
by Saturninus, and was this: That he condemned the young men, but not
to death; for that it was not fit for him, who had three sons of his
own now present, to give his vote for the destruction of the sons of
another. The two lieutenants also gave the like vote; some others there
were also who followed their example; but Volumnius began to vote on the
more melancholy side, and all those that came after him condemned the
young men to die, some out of flattery, and some out of hatred to Herod;
but none out of indignation at their crimes. And now all Syria and Judea
was in great expectation, and waited for the last act of this tragedy;
yet did nobody, suppose that Herod would be so barbarous as to murder
his children: however, he carried them away to Tyre, and thence sailed
to Cesarea, and deliberated with himself what sort of death the young
men should suffer.

4. Now there was a certain old soldier of the king's, whose name
was Tero, who had a son that was very familiar with and a friend to
Alexander, and who himself particularly loved the young men. This
soldier was in a manner distracted, out of the excess of the indignation
he had at what was doing; and at first he cried out aloud, as he went
about, that justice was trampled under foot; that truth was perished,
and nature confounded; and that the life of man was full of iniquity,
and every thing else that passion could suggest to a man who spared
not his own life; and at last he ventured to go to the king, and said,
"Truly I think thou art a most miserable man, when thou hearkenest to
most wicked wretches, against those that ought to be dearest to thee;
since thou hast frequently resolved that Pheroras and Salome should be
put to death, and yet believest them against thy sons; while these,
by cutting off the succession of thine own sons, leave all wholly
to Antipater, and thereby choose to have thee such a king as may be
thoroughly in their own power. However, consider whether this death of
Antipater's brethren will not make him hated by the soldiers; for there
is nobody but commiserates the young men; and of the captains, a great
many show their indignation at it openly." Upon his saying this, he
named those that had such indignation; but the king ordered those men,
with Tero himself and his son, to be seized upon immediately.

5. At which time there was a certain barber, whose name was Trypho. This
man leaped out from among the people in a kind of madness, and accused
himself, and said, "This Tero endeavored to persuade me also to cut thy
throat with my razor, when I trimmed thee, and promised that Alexander
should give me large presents for so doing." When Herod heard this, he
examined Tero, with his son and the barber, by the torture; but as the
others denied the accusation, and he said nothing further, Herod gave
order that Tero should be racked more severely; but his son, out of pity
to his father, promised to discover the whole to the king, if he would
grant [that his father should be no longer tortured]. When he had agreed
to this, he said that his father, at the persuasion of Alexander, had an
intention to kill him. Now some said this was forged, in order to free
his father from his torments; and some said it was true.

6. And now Herod accused the captains and Tero in an assembly of the
people, and brought the people together in a body against them; and
accordingly there were they put to death, together with [Trypho] the
barber; they were killed by the pieces of wood and the stones that were
thrown at them. He also sent his sons to Sebaste, a city not far from
Cesarea, and ordered them to be there strangled; and as what he had
ordered was executed immediately, so he commanded that their dead
bodies should be brought to the fortress Alexandrium, to be buried with
Alexander, their grandfather by the mother's side. And this was the end
of Alexander and Aristobulus.






CHAPTER 28.


     How Antipater Is Hated Of All Men; And How The King Espouses
     The Sons Of Those That Had Been Slain To His Kindred; But
     That Antipater Made Him Change Them For Other Women. Of
     Herod's Marriages, And Children.

1. But an intolerable hatred fell upon Antipater from the nation, though
he had now an indisputable title to the succession, because they all
knew that he was the person who contrived all the calumnies against
his brethren. However, he began to be in a terrible fear, as he saw the
posterity of those that had been slain growing up; for Alexander had two
sons by Glaphyra, Tigranes and Alexander; and Aristobulus had Herod,
and Agrippa, and Aristobulus, his sons, with Herodias and Mariamne,
his daughters, and all by Bernice, Salome's daughter. As for Glaphyra,
Herod, as soon as he had killed Alexander, sent her back, together with
her portion, to Cappadocia. He married Bernice, Aristobulus's daughter,
to Antipater's uncle by his mother, and it was Antipater who, in
order to reconcile her to him, when she had been at variance with him,
contrived this match; he also got into Pheroras's favor, and into
the favor of Caesar's friends, by presents, and other ways of
obsequiousness, and sent no small sums of money to Rome; Saturninus
also, and his friends in Syria, were all well replenished with the
presents he made them; yet the more he gave, the more he was hated, as
not making these presents out of generosity, but spending his money out
of fear. Accordingly, it so fell out that the receivers bore him no more
good-will than before, but that those to whom he gave nothing were his
more bitter enemies. However, he bestowed his money every day more and
more profusely, on observing that, contrary to his expectations, the
king was taking care about the orphans, and discovering at the same time
his repentance for killing their fathers, by his commiseration of those
that sprang from them.

2. Accordingly, Herod got together his kindred and friends, and set
before them the children, and, with his eyes full of tears, said thus
to them: "It was an unlucky fate that took away from me these
children's fathers, which children are recommended to me by that natural
commiseration which their orphan condition requires; however, I will
endeavor, though I have been a most unfortunate father, to appear a
better grandfather, and to leave these children such curators after
myself as are dearest to me. I therefore betroth thy daughter, Pheroras,
to the elder of these brethren, the children of Alexander, that thou
mayst be obliged to take care of them. I also betroth to thy son,
Antipater, the daughter of Aristobulus; be thou therefore a father to
that orphan; and my son Herod [Philip] shall have her sister, whose
grandfather, by the mother's side, was high priest. And let every one
that loves me be of my sentiments in these dispositions, which none that
hath an affection for me will abrogate. And I pray God that he will join
these children together in marriage, to the advantage of my kingdom, and
of my posterity; and may he look down with eyes more serene upon them
than he looked upon their fathers."

3. While he spake these words he wept, and joined the children's
right hands together; after which he embraced them every one after an
affectionate manner, and dismissed the assembly. Upon this, Antipater
was in great disorder immediately, and lamented publicly at what was
done; for he supposed that this dignity which was conferred on these
orphans was for his own destruction, even in his father's lifetime, and
that he should run another risk of losing the government, if Alexander's
sons should have both Archelaus [a king], and Pheroras a tetrarch, to
support them. He also considered how he was himself hated by the nation,
and how they pitied these orphans; how great affection the Jews bare
to those brethren of his when they were alive, and how gladly they
remembered them now they had perished by his means. So he resolved by
all the ways possible to get these espousals dissolved.

4. Now he was afraid of going subtlely about this matter with his
father, who was hard to be pleased, and was presently moved upon the
least suspicion: so he ventured to go to him directly, and to beg of
him before his face not to deprive him of that dignity which he had been
pleased to bestow upon him; and that he might not have the bare name of
a king, while the power was in other persons; for that he should never
be able to keep the government, if Alexander's son was to have both his
grandfather Archelaus and Pheroras for his curators; and he besought him
earnestly, since there were so many of the royal family alive, that he
would change those [intended] marriages. Now the king had nine wives, 42
and children by seven of them; Antipater was himself born of Doris, and
Herod Philip of Mariamne, the high priest's daughter; Antipas also and
Archelaus were by Malthace, the Samaritan, as was his daughter Olympias,
which his brother Joseph's 43 son had married. By Cleopatra of Jerusalem
he had Herod and Philip; and by Pallas, Phasaelus; he had also two
daughters, Roxana and Salome, the one by Phedra, and the other by Elpis;
he had also two wives that had no children, the one his first cousin,
and the other his niece; and besides these he had two daughters, the
sisters of Alexander and Aristobulus, by Mariamne. Since, therefore,
the royal family was so numerous, Antipater prayed him to change these
intended marriages.

5. When the king perceived what disposition he was in towards these
orphans, he was angry at it, and a suspicion came into his mind as to
those sons whom he had put to death, whether that had not been brought
about by the false tales of Antipater; so that at that time he made
Antipater a long and a peevish answer, and bid him begone. Yet was he
afterwards prevailed upon cunningly by his flatteries, and changed the
marriages; he married Aristobulus's daughter to him, and his son to
Pheroras's daughter.

6. Now one may learn, in this instance, how very much this flattering
Antipater could do,--even what Salome in the like circumstances could
not do; for when she, who was his sister, and who, by the means of
Julia, Caesar's wife, earnestly desired leave to be married to Sylleus
the Arabian, Herod swore he would esteem her his bitter enemy, unless
she would leave off that project: he also caused her, against her own
consent, to be married to Alexas, a friend of his, and that one of
her daughters should be married to Alexas's son, and the other to
Antipater's uncle by the mother's side. And for the daughters the king
had by Mariamne, the one was married to Antipater, his sister's son, and
the other to his brother's son, Phasaelus.






CHAPTER 29.


     Antipater Becomes Intolerable. He Is Sent To Rome, And
     Carries Herod's Testament With Him; Pheroras Leaves His
     Brother, That He May Keep His Wife. He Dies At Home.

1. Now when Antipater had cut off the hopes of the orphans, and had
contracted such affinities as would be most for his own advantage, he
proceeded briskly, as having a certain expectation of the kingdom; and
as he had now assurance added to his wickedness, he became intolerable;
for not being able to avoid the hatred of all people, he built his
security upon the terror he struck into them. Pheroras also assisted him
in his designs, looking upon him as already fixed in the kingdom.
There was also a company of women in the court, which excited new
disturbances; for Pheroras's wife, together with her mother and sister,
as also Antipater's mother, grew very impudent in the palace. She also
was so insolent as to affront the king's two daughters, 44 on which
account the king hated her to a great degree; yet although these women
were hated by him, they domineered over others: there was only Salome
who opposed their good agreement, and informed the king of their
meetings, as not being for the advantage of his affairs. And when those
women knew what calumnies she had raised against them, and how much
Herod was displeased, they left off their public meetings, and friendly
entertainments of one another; nay, on the contrary, they pretended
to quarrel one with another when the king was within hearing. The like
dissimulation did Antipater make use of; and when matters were public,
he opposed Pheroras; but still they had private cabals and merry
meetings in the night time; nor did the observation of others do any
more than confirm their mutual agreement. However, Salome knew every
thing they did, and told every thing to Herod.

2. But he was inflamed with anger at them, and chiefly at Pheroras's
wife; for Salome had principally accused her. So he got an assembly of
his friends and kindred together, and there accused this woman of many
things, and particularly of the affronts she had offered his daughters;
and that she had supplied the Pharisees with money, by way of rewards
for what they had done against him, and had procured his brother to
become his enemy, by giving him love potions. At length he turned his
speech to Pheroras, and told him that he would give him his choice of
these two things: Whether he would keep in with his brother, or with his
wife? And when Pheroras said that he would die rather than forsake his
wife, Herod, not knowing what to do further in that matter, turned his
speech to Antipater, and charged him to have no intercourse either with
Pheroras's wife, or with Pheroras himself, or with any one belonging
to her. Now though Antipater did not transgress that his injunction
publicly, yet did he in secret come to their night meetings; and because
he was afraid that Salome observed what he did, he procured, by the
means of his Italian friends, that he might go and live at Rome; for
when they wrote that it was proper for Antipater to be sent to Caesar
for some time, Herod made no delay, but sent him, and that with a
splendid attendance, and a great deal of money, and gave him his
testament to carry with him,--wherein Antipater had the kingdom
bequeathed to him, and wherein Herod was named for Antipater's
successor; that Herod, I mean, who was the son of Mariamne, the high
priest's daughter.

3. Sylleus also, the Arabian, sailed to Rome, without any regard to
Caesar's injunctions, and this in order to oppose Antipater with all
his might, as to that law-suit which Nicolaus had with him before. This
Sylleus had also a great contest with Aretas his own king; for he had
slain many others of Aretas's friends, and particularly Sohemus, the
most potent man in the city Petra. Moreover, he had prevailed with
Phabatus, who was Herod's steward, by giving him a great sum of money,
to assist him against Herod; but when Herod gave him more, he induced
him to leave Sylleus, and by this means he demanded of him all that
Caesar had required of him to pay. But when Sylleus paid nothing of what
he was to pay, and did also accuse Phabatus to Caesar, and said that he
was not a steward for Caesar's advantage, but for Herod's, Phabatus was
angry at him on that account, but was still in very great esteem with
Herod, and discovered Sylleus's grand secrets, and told the king that
Sylleus had corrupted Corinthus, one of the guards of his body, by
bribing him, and of whom he must therefore have a care. Accordingly, the
king complied; for this Corinthus, though he was brought up in Herod's
kingdom, yet was he by birth an Arabian; so the king ordered him to be
taken up immediately, and not only him, but two other Arabians, who were
caught with him; the one of them was Sylleus's friend, the other the
head of a tribe. These last, being put to the torture, confessed that
they had prevailed with Corinthus, for a large sum of money, to kill
Herod; and when they had been further examined before Saturninus, the
president of Syria, they were sent to Rome.

4. However, Herod did not leave off importuning Pheroras, but proceeded
to force him to put away his wife; 45 yet could he not devise any way
by which he could bring the woman herself to punishment, although he
had many causes of hatred to her; till at length he was in such great
uneasiness at her, that he cast both her and his brother out of his
kingdom. Pheroras took this injury very patiently, and went away into
his own tetrarchy, [Perea beyond Jordan,] and sware that there should
be but one end put to his flight, and that should be Herod's death;
and that he would never return while he was alive. Nor indeed would he
return when his brother was sick, although he earnestly sent for him to
come to him, because he had a mind to leave some injunctions with him
before he died; but Herod unexpectedly recovered. A little afterward
Pheroras himself fell sick, when Herod showed great moderation; for
he came to him, and pitied his case, and took care of him; but his
affection for him did him no good, for Pheroras died a little afterward.
Now though Herod had so great an affection for him to the last day
of his life, yet was a report spread abroad that he had killed him
by poison. However, he took care to have his dead body carried to
Jerusalem, and appointed a very great mourning to the whole nation for
him, and bestowed a most pompous funeral upon him. And this was the end
that one of Alexander's and Aristobulus's murderers came to.






CHAPTER 30.


     When Herod Made Inquiry About Pheroras's Death A Discovery
     Was Made That Antipater Had Prepared A Poisonous Draught For
     Him. Herod Casts Doris And Her Accomplices, As Also
     Mariamne, Out Of The Palace And Blots Her Son Herod Out Of
     His Testament.

1. But now the punishment was transferred unto the original author,
Antipater, and took its rise from the death of Pheroras; for certain of
his freed-men came with a sad countenance to the king, and told him that
his brother had been destroyed by poison, and that his wife had brought
him somewhat that was prepared after an unusual manner, and that, upon
his eating it, he presently fell into his distemper; that Antipater's
mother and sister, two days before, brought a woman out of Arabia that
was skillful in mixing such drugs, that she might prepare a love potion
for Pheroras; and that instead of a love potion, she had given him
deadly poison; and that this was done by the management of Sylleus, who
was acquainted with that woman.

2. The king was deeply affected with so many suspicions, and had the
maid-servants and some of the free women also tortured; one of which
cried out in her agonies, "May that God that governs the earth and
the heaven punish this author of all these our miseries, Antipater's
mother!" The king took a handle from this confession, and proceeded to
inquire further into the truth of the matter. So this woman discovered
the friendship of Antipater's mother to Pheroras, and Antipater's women,
as also their secret meetings, and that Pheroras and Antipater had drunk
with them for a whole night together as they returned from the king,
and would not suffer any body, either man-servant or maidservant, to be
there; while one of the free women discovered the matter.

3. Upon this Herod tortured the maid-servants every one by themselves
separately, who all unanimously agreed in the foregoing discoveries,
and that accordingly by agreement they went away, Antipater to Rome, and
Pheroras to Perea; for that they oftentimes talked to one another thus:
That after Herod had slain Alexander and Aristobulus, he would fall upon
them, and upon their wives, because, after he Mariamne and her children
he would spare nobody; and that for this reason it was best to get as
far off the wild beast as they were able:--and that Antipater oftentimes
lamented his own case before his mother, and said to her, that he had
already gray hairs upon his head, and that his father grew younger again
every day, and that perhaps death would overtake him before he should
begin to be a king in earnest; and that in case Herod should die, which
yet nobody knew when it would be, the enjoyment of the succession could
certainly be but for a little time; for that these heads of Hydra, the
sons of Alexander and Aristobulus, were growing up: that he was deprived
by his father of the hopes of being succeeded by his children, for that
his successor after his death was not to be any one of his own sons,
but Herod the son of Mariamne: that in this point Herod was plainly
distracted, to think that his testament should therein take place; for
he would take care that not one of his posterity should remain, because
he was of all fathers the greatest hater of his children. Yet does he
hate his brother still worse; whence it was that he a while ago gave
himself a hundred talents, that he should not have any intercourse with
Pheroras. And when Pheroras said, Wherein have we done him any harm?
Antipater replied, "I wish he would but deprive us of all we have, and
leave us naked and alive only; but it is indeed impossible to escape
this wild beast, who is thus given to murder, who will not permit us to
love any person openly, although we be together privately; yet may we be
so openly too, if we have but the courage and the hands of men."

4. These things were said by the women upon the torture; as also that
Pheroras resolved to fly with them to Perea. Now Herod gave credit to
all they said, on account of the affair of the hundred talents; for he
had no discourse with any body about them, but only with Antipater. So
he vented his anger first of all against Antipater's mother, and took
away from her all the ornaments which he had given her, which cost a
great many talents, and cast her out of the palace a second time. He
also took care of Pheroras's women after their tortures, as being now
reconciled to them; but he was in great consternation himself, and
inflamed upon every suspicion, and had many innocent persons led to
the torture, out of his fear lest he should leave any guilty person
untortured.

5. And now it was that he betook himself to examine Antipater of
Samaria, who was the steward of [his son] Antipater; and upon torturing
him, he learned that Antipater had sent for a potion of deadly poison
for him out of Egypt, by Antiphilus, a companion of his; that Theudio,
the uncle of Antipater, had it from him, and delivered it to Pheroras;
for that Antipater had charged him to take his father off while he was
at Rome, and so free him from the suspicion of doing it himself: that
Pheroras also committed this potion to his wife. Then did the king send
for her, and bid her bring to him what she had received immediately. So
she came out of her house as if she would bring it with her, but
threw herself down from the top of the house, in order to prevent any
examination and torture from the king. However, it came to pass, as it
seems by the providence of God, when he intended to bring Antipater to
punishment, that she fell not upon her head, but upon other parts of her
body, and escaped. The king, when she was brought to him, took care of
her, [for she was at first quite senseless upon her fall,] and asked
her why she had thrown herself down; and gave her his oath, that if she
would speak the real truth, he would excuse her from punishment; but
that if she concealed any thing, he would have her body torn to pieces
by torments, and leave no part of it to be buried.

6. Upon this the woman paused a little, and then said, "Why do I spare
to speak of these grand secrets, now Pheroras is dead? that would only
tend to save Antipater, who is all our destruction. Hear then, O king,
and be thou, and God himself, who cannot be deceived, witnesses to the
truth of what I am going to say. When thou didst sit weeping by Pheroras
as he was dying," then it was that he called me to him, and said, "My
dear wife, I have been greatly mistaken as to the disposition of my
brother towards me, and have hated him that is so affectionate to me,
and have contrived to kill him who is in such disorder for me before I
am dead. As for myself, I receive the recompence of my impiety; but do
thou bring what poison was left with us by Antipater, and which thou
keepest in order to destroy him, and consume it immediately in the fire
in my sight, that I may not be liable to the avenger in the invisible
world." This I brought as he bid me, and emptied the greatest part of
it into the fire, but reserved a little of it for my own use against
uncertain futurity, and out of my fear of thee.

7. When she had said this, she brought the box, which had a small
quantity of this potion in it: but the king let her alone, and
transferred the tortures to Antiphilus's mother and brother; who both
confessed that Antiphilus brought the box out of Egypt, and that they
had received the potion from a brother of his, who was a physician at
Alexandria. Then did the ghosts of Alexander and Aristobulus go round
all the palace, and became the inquisitors and discoverers of what could
not otherwise have been found out and brought such as were the freest
from suspicion to be examined; whereby it was discovered that Mariamne,
the high priest's daughter, was conscious of this plot; and her very
brothers, when they were tortured, declared it so to be. Whereupon
the king avenged this insolent attempt of the mother upon her son, and
blotted Herod, whom he had by her, out of his tretament, who had been
before named therein as successor to Antipater.






CHAPTER 31.


     Antipater Is Convicted By Bathyllus; But He Still Returns
     From Rome Without Knowing It. Herod Brings Him To His Trial.

1. After these things were over, Bathyllus came under examination, in
order to convict Antipater, who proved the concluding attestation to
Antipater's designs; for indeed he was no other than his freed-man. This
man came, and brought another deadly potion, the poison of asps, and
the juices of other serpents, that if the first potion did not do the
business, Pheroras and his wife might be armed with this also to destroy
the king. He brought also an addition to Antipater's insolent attempt
against his father, which was the letters which he wrote against his
brethren, Archelaus and Philip, which were the king's sons, and educated
at Rome, being yet youths, but of generous dispositions. Antipater set
himself to get rid of these as soon as he could, that they might not be
prejudicial to his hopes; and to that end he forged letters against them
in the name of his friends at Rome. Some of these he corrupted by bribes
to write how they grossly reproached their father, and did openly bewail
Alexander and Aristobulus, and were uneasy at their being recalled; for
their father had already sent for them, which was the very thing that
troubled Antipater.

2. Nay, indeed, while Antipater was in Judea, and before he was upon
his journey to Rome, he gave money to have the like letters against them
sent from Rome, and then came to his father, who as yet had no suspicion
of him, and apologized for his brethren, and alleged on their behalf
that some of the things contained in those letters were false, and
others of them were only youthful errors. Yet at the same time that he
expended a great deal of his money, by making presents to such as wrote
against his brethren, did he aim to bring his accounts into confusion,
by buying costly garments, and carpets of various contextures, with
silver and gold cups, and a great many more curious things, that so,
among the view great expenses laid out upon such furniture, he might
conceal the money he had used in hiring men [to write the letters];
for he brought in an account of his expenses, amounting to two hundred
talents, his main pretense for which was file law-suit he had been in
with Sylleus. So while all his rogueries, even those of a lesser sort
also, were covered by his greater villainy, while all the examinations
by torture proclaimed his attempt to murder his father, and the letters
proclaimed his second attempt to murder his brethren; yet did no one of
those that came to Rome inform him of his misfortunes in Judea, although
seven months had intervened between his conviction and his return, so
great was the hatred which they all bore to him. And perhaps they were
the ghosts of those brethren of his that had been murdered that stopped
the mouths of those that intended to have told him. He then wrote from
Rome, and informed his [friends] that he would soon come to them, and
how he was dismissed with honor by Caesar.

3. Now the king, being desirous to get this plotter against him into
his hands, and being also afraid lest he should some way come to the
knowledge how his affairs stood, and be upon his guard, he dissembled
his anger in his epistle to him, as in other points he wrote kindly to
him, and desired him to make haste, because if he came quickly, he would
then lay aside the complaints he had against his mother; for Antipater
was not ignorant that his mother had been expelled out of the palace.
However, he had before received a letter, which contained an account of
the death of Pheroras, at Tarentum, 46 and made great lamentations at
it; for which some commended him, as being for his own uncle; though
probably this confusion arose on account of his having thereby failed in
his plot [on his father's life]; and his tears were more for the loss
of him that was to have been subservient therein, than for [an uncle]
Pheroras: moreover, a sort of fear came upon him as to his designs, lest
the poison should have been discovered. However, when he was in Cilicia,
he received the forementioned epistle from his father, and made great
haste accordingly. But when he had sailed to Celenderis, a suspicion
came into his mind relating to his mother's misfortunes; as if his soul
foreboded some mischief to itself. Those therefore of his friends which
were the most considerate advised him not rashly to go to his father,
till he had learned what were the occasions why his mother had been
ejected, because they were afraid that he might be involved in the
calumnies that had been cast upon his mother: but those that were less
considerate, and had more regard to their own desires of seeing their
native country, than to Antipater's safety, persuaded him to make haste
home, and not, by delaying his journey, afford his father ground for an
ill suspicion, and give a handle to those that raised stories against
him; for that in case any thing had been moved to his disadvantage, it
was owing to his absence, which durst not have been done had he been
present. And they said it was absurd to deprive himself of certain
happiness, for the sake of an uncertain suspicion, and not rather to
return to his father, and take the royal authority upon him, which was
in a state of fluctuation on his account only. Antipater complied with
this last advice, for Providence hurried him on [to his destruction]. So
he passed over the sea, and landed at Sebastus, the haven of Cesarea.

4. And here he found a perfect and unexpected solitude, while ever body
avoided him, and nobody durst come at him; for he was equally hated by
all men; and now that hatred had liberty to show itself, and the dread
men were in at the king's anger made men keep from him; for the whole
city [of Jerusalem] was filled with the rumors about Antipater, and
Antipater himself was the only person who was ignorant of them; for as
no man was dismissed more magnificently when he began his voyage to Rome
so was no man now received back with greater ignominy. And indeed he
began already to suspect what misfortunes there were in Herod's family;
yet did he cunningly conceal his suspicion; and while he was inwardly
ready to die for fear, he put on a forced boldness of countenance. Nor
could he now fly any whither, nor had he any way of emerging out of the
difficulties which encompassed him; nor indeed had he even there any
certain intelligence of the affairs of the royal family, by reason
of the threats the king had given out: yet had he some small hopes
of better tidings; for perhaps nothing had been discovered; or if any
discovery had been made, perhaps he should be able to clear himself by
impudence and artful tricks, which were the only things he relied upon
for his deliverance.

5. And with these hopes did he screen himself, till he came to the
palace, without any friends with him; for these were affronted, and shut
out at the first gate. Now Varus, the president of Syria, happened to
be in the palace [at this juncture]; so Antipater went in to his father,
and, putting on a bold face, he came near to salute him. But Herod
Stretched out his hands, and turned his head away from him, and cried
out, "Even this is an indication of a parricide, to be desirous to
get me into his arms, when he is under such heinous accusations. God
confound thee, thou vile wretch; do not thou touch me, till thou hast
cleared thyself of these crimes that are charged upon thee. I appoint
thee a court where thou art to be judged, and this Varus, who is very
seasonably here, to be thy judge; and get thou thy defense ready against
tomorrow, for I give thee so much time to prepare suitable excuses for
thyself." And as Antipater was so confounded, that he was able to make
no answer to this charge, he went away; but his mother and wife came
to him, and told him of all the evidence they had gotten against him.
Hereupon he recollected himself, and considered what defense he should
make against the accusations.






CHAPTER 32.


     Antipater Is Accused Before Varus, And Is Convicted Of
     Laying A Plot [Against His Father] By The Strongest
     Evidence. Herod Puts Off His Punishment Till He Should Be
     Recovered, And In The Mean Time Alters His Testament.

1. Now the day following the king assembled a court of his kinsmen and
friends, and called in Antipater's friends also. Herod himself, with
Varus, were the presidents; and Herod called for all the witnesses, and
ordered them to be brought in; among whom some of the domestic servants
of Antipater's mother were brought in also, who had but a little while
before been caught, as they were carrying the following letter from her
to her son: "Since all those things have been already discovered to
thy father, do not thou come to him, unless thou canst procure some
assistance from Caesar." When this and the other witnesses were
introduced, Antipater came in, and falling on his face before his
father's feet, he said, "Father, I beseech thee, do not condemn me
beforehand, but let thy ears be unbiassed, and attend to my defense; for
if thou wilt give me leave, I will demonstrate that I am innocent."

2. Hereupon Herod cried out to him to hold his peace, and spake thus
to Varus: "I cannot but think that thou, Varus, and every other upright
judge, will determine that Antipater is a vile wretch. I am also afraid
that thou wilt abhor my ill fortune, and judge me also myself worthy
of all sorts of calamity for begetting such children; while yet I ought
rather to be pitied, who have been so affectionate a father to such
wretched sons; for when I had settled the kingdom on my former sons,
even when they were young, and when, besides the charges of their
education at Rome, I had made them the friends of Caesar, and made them
envied by other kings, I found them plotting against me. These have been
put to death, and that, in great measure, for the sake of Antipater;
for as he was then young, and appointed to be my successor, I took care
chiefly to secure him from danger: but this profligate wild beast, when
he had been over and above satiated with that patience which I showed
him, he made use of that abundance I had given him against myself; for I
seemed to him to live too long, and he was very uneasy at the old age
I was arrived at; nor could he stay any longer, but would be a king by
parricide. And justly I am served by him for bringing him back out of
the country to court, when he was of no esteem before, and for thrusting
out those sons of mine that were born of the queen, and for making him a
successor to my dominions. I confess to thee, O Varus, the great folly I
was guilty for I provoked those sons of mine to act against me, and cut
off their just expectations for the sake of Antipater; and indeed what
kindness did I do them; that could equal what I have done to Antipater?
to I have, in a manner, yielded up my royal while I am alive, and whom I
have openly named for the successor to my dominions in my testament, and
given him a yearly revenue of his own of fifty talents, and supplied him
with money to an extravagant degree out of my own revenue; and' when
he was about to sail to Rome, I gave him three talents, and recommended
him, and him alone of all my children, to Caesar, as his father's
deliverer. Now what crimes were those other sons of mine guilty of like
these of Antipater? and what evidence was there brought against them so
strong as there is to demonstrate this son to have plotted against
me? Yet does this parricide presume to speak for himself, and hopes
to obscure the truth by his cunning tricks. Thou, O Varus, must guard
thyself against him; for I know the wild beast, and I foresee how
plausibly he will talk, and his counterfeit lamentation. This was he who
exhorted me to have a care of Alexander when he was alive, and not to
intrust my body with all men! This was he who came to my very bed, and
looked about lest any one should lay snares for me! This was he who took
care of my sleep, and secured me from fear of danger, who comforted me
under the trouble I was in upon the slaughter of my sons, and looked to
see what affection my surviving brethren bore me! This was my protector,
and the guardian of my body! And when I call to mind, O Varus, his
craftiness upon every occasion, and his art of dissembling, I can hardly
believe that I am still alive, and I wonder how I have escaped such a
deep plotter of mischief. However, since some fate or other makes my
house desolate, and perpetually raises up those that are dearest to me
against me, I will, with tears, lament my hard fortune, and privately
groan under my lonesome condition; yet am I resolved that no one who
thirsts after my blood shall escape punishment, although the evidence
should extend itself to all my sons."

3. Upon Herod's saying this, he was interrupted by the confusion he was
in; but ordered Nicolaus, one of his friends, to produce the evidence
against Antipater. But in the mean time Antipater lifted up his head,
[for he lay on the ground before his father's feet,] and cried out
aloud, "Thou, O father, hast made my apology for me; for how can I be
a parricide, whom thou thyself confessest to have always had for
thy guardian? Thou callest my filial affection prodigious lies and
hypocrisy! how then could it be that I, who was so subtle in other
matters, should here be so mad as not to understand that it was not easy
that he who committed so horrid a crime should be concealed from men,
but impossible that he should be concealed from the Judge of heaven, who
sees all things, and is present every where? or did not I know what end
my brethren came to, on whom God inflicted so great a punishment for
their evil designs against thee? And indeed what was there that could
possibly provoke me against thee? Could the hope of being king do it?
I was a king already. Could I suspect hatred from thee? No. Was not I
beloved by thee? And what other fear could I have? Nay, by preserving
thee safe, I was a terror to others. Did I want money? No; for who was
able to expend so much as myself? Indeed, father, had I been the most
execrable of all mankind, and had I had the soul of the most cruel
wild beast, must I not have been overcome with the benefits thou hadst
bestowed upon me? whom, as thou thyself sayest, thou broughtest [into
the palace]; whom thou didst prefer before so many of thy sons; whom
thou madest a king in thine own lifetime, and, by the vast magnitude of
the other advantages thou bestowedst on me, thou madest me an object of
envy. O miserable man! that thou shouldst undergo this bitter absence,
and thereby afford a great opportunity for envy to arise against thee,
and a long space for such as were laying designs against thee! Yet was
I absent, father, on thy affairs, that Sylleus might not treat thee with
contempt in thine old age. Rome is a witness to my filial affection, and
so is Caesar, the ruler of the habitable earth, who oftentimes called me
Philopater. 47 Take here the letters he hath sent thee, they are more
to be believed than the calumnies raised here; these letters are my only
apology; these I use as the demonstration of that natural affection I
have to thee. Remember that it was against my own choice that I sailed
[to Rome], as knowing the latent hatred that was in the kingdom against
me. It was thou, O father, however unwillingly, who hast been my ruin,
by forcing me to allow time for calumnies against me, and envy at me.
However, I am come hither, and am ready to hear the evidence there
is against me. If I be a parricide, I have passed by land and by sea,
without suffering any misfortune on either of them: but this method of
trial is no advantage to me; for it seems, O father, that I am already
condemned, both before God and before thee; and as I am already
condemned, I beg that thou wilt not believe the others that have been
tortured, but let fire be brought to torment me; let the racks march
through my bowels; have no regard to any lamentations that this polluted
body can make; for if I be a parricide, I ought not to die without
torture." Thus did Antipater cry out with lamentation and weeping, and
moved all the rest, and Varus in particular, to commiserate his case.
Herod was the only person whose passion was too strong to permit him to
weep, as knowing that the testimonies against him were true.

4. And now it was that, at the king's command, Nicolaus, when he
had premised a great deal about the craftiness of Antipater, and had
prevented the effects of their commiseration to him, afterwards
brought in a bitter and large accusation against him, ascribing all
the wickedness that had been in the kingdom to him, and especially the
murder of his brethren; and demonstrated that they had perished by the
calumnies he had raised against them. He also said that he had laid
designs against them that were still alive, as if they were laying plots
for the succession; and [said he] how can it be supposed that he who
prepared poison for his father should abstain from mischief as to his
brethren? He then proceeded to convict him of the attempt to poison
Herod, and gave an account in order of the several discoveries that
had been made; and had great indignation as to the affair of Pheroras,
because Antipater had been for making him murder his brother, and had
corrupted those that were dearest to the king, and filled the whole
palace with wickedness; and when he had insisted on many other
accusations, and the proofs for them, he left off.

5. Then Varus bid Antipater make his defense; but he lay along in
silence, and said no more but this, "God is my witness that I am
entirely innocent." So Varus asked for the potion, and gave it to be
drunk by a condemned malefactor, who was then in prison, who died upon
the spot. So Varus, when he had had a very private discourse with Herod,
and had written an account of this assembly to Caesar, went away, after
a day's stay. The king also bound Antipater, and sent away to inform
Caesar of his misfortunes.

6. Now after this it was discovered that Antipater had laid a plot
against Salome also; for one of Antiphilus's domestic servants came,
and brought letters from Rome, from a maid-servant of Julia, [Caesar's
wife,] whose name was Acme. By her a message was sent to the king, that
she had found a letter written by Salome, among Julia's papers, and had
sent it to him privately, out of her good-will to him. This letter of
Salome contained the most bitter reproaches of the king, and the highest
accusations against him. Antipater had forged this letter, and had
corrupted Acme, and persuaded her to send it to Herod. This was proved
by her letter to Antipater, for thus did this woman write to him: "As
thou desirest, I have written a letter to thy father, and have sent that
letter, and am persuaded that the king will not spare his sister when he
reads it. Thou wilt do well to remember what thou hast promised when all
is accomplished."

7. When this epistle was discovered, and what the epistle forged against
Salome contained, a suspicion came into the king's mind, that perhaps
the letters against Alexander were also forged: he was moreover greatly
disturbed, and in a passion, because he had almost slain his sister on
Antipater's account. He did no longer delay therefore to bring him
to punishment for all his crimes; yet when he was eagerly pursuing
Antipater, he was restrained by a severe distemper he fell into.
However, he sent all account to Caesar about Acme, and the contrivances
against Salome; he sent also for his testament, and altered it, and
therein made Antipas king, as taking no care of Archelaus and Philip,
because Antipater had blasted their reputations with him; but he
bequeathed to Caesar, besides other presents that he gave him, a
thousand talents; as also to his wife, and children, and friends, and
freed-men about five hundred: he also bequeathed to all others a great
quantity of land, and of money, and showed his respects to Salome
his sister, by giving her most splendid gifts. And this was what was
contained in his testament, as it was now altered.






CHAPTER 33.


     The Golden Eagle Is Cut To Pieces. Herod's Barbarity When He
     Was Ready To Die. He Attempts To Kill Himself. He Commands
     Antipater To Be Slain. He Survives Him Five Days And Then
     Dies.

1. Now Herod's distemper became more and more severe to him, and this
because these his disorders fell upon him in his old age, and when he
was in a melancholy condition; for he was already seventy years of age,
and had been brought by the calamities that happened to him about
his children, whereby he had no pleasure in life, even when he was in
health; the grief also that Antipater was still alive aggravated his
disease, whom he resolved to put to death now not at random, but as soon
as he should be well again, and resolved to have him slain [in a public
manner].

2. There also now happened to him, among his other calamities, a
certain popular sedition. There were two men of learning in the city
[Jerusalem,] who were thought the most skillful in the laws of their
country, and were on that account had in very great esteem all over the
nation; they were, the one Judas, the son of Sepphoris, and the other
Matthias, the son of Margalus. There was a great concourse of the young
men to these men when they expounded the laws, and there got together
every day a kind of an army of such as were growing up to be men.
Now when these men were informed that the king was wearing away
with melancholy, and with a distemper, they dropped words to their
acquaintance, how it was now a very proper time to defend the cause
of God, and to pull down what had been erected contrary to the laws of
their country; for it was unlawful there should be any such thing in
the temple as images, or faces, or the like representation of any animal
whatsoever. Now the king had put up a golden eagle over the great gate
of the temple, which these learned men exhorted them to cut down; and
told them, that if there should any danger arise, it was a glorious
thing to die for the laws of their country; because that the soul was
immortal, and that an eternal enjoyment of happiness did await such as
died on that account; while the mean-spirited, and those that were not
wise enough to show a right love of their souls, preferred a death by a
disease, before that which is the result of a virtuous behavior.

3. At the same time that these men made this speech to their disciples,
a rumor was spread abroad that the king was dying, which made the
young men set about the work with greater boldness; they therefore let
themselves down from the top of the temple with thick cords, and this at
midday, and while a great number of people were in the temple, and cut
down that golden eagle with axes. This was presently told to the king's
captain of the temple, who came running with a great body of soldiers,
and caught about forty of the young men, and brought them to the king.
And when he asked them, first of all, whether they had been so hardy as
to cut down the golden eagle, they confessed they had done so; and when
he asked them by whose command they had done it, they replied, at the
command of the law of their country; and when he further asked them how
they could be so joyful when they were to be put to death, they replied,
because they should enjoy greater happiness after they were dead. 48

4. At this the king was in such an extravagant passion, that he overcame
his disease [for the time,] and went out, and spake to the people;
wherein he made a terrible accusation against those men, as being guilty
of sacrilege, and as making greater attempts under pretense of their
law, and he thought they deserved to be punished as impious persons.
Whereupon the people were afraid lest a great number should be found
guilty and desired that when he had first punished those that put them
upon this work, and then those that were caught in it, he would leave
off his anger as to the rest. With this the king complied, though not
without difficulty, and ordered those that had let themselves down,
together with their Rabbins, to be burnt alive, but delivered the rest
that were caught to the proper officers, to be put to death by them.

5. After this, the distemper seized upon his whole body, and greatly
disordered all its parts with various symptoms; for there was a gentle
fever upon him, and an intolerable itching over all the surface of his
body, and continual pains in his colon, and dropsical turnouts about
his feet, and an inflammation of the abdomen, and a putrefaction of his
privy member, that produced worms. Besides which he had a difficulty of
breathing upon him, and could not breathe but when he sat upright, and
had a convulsion of all his members, insomuch that the diviners said
those diseases were a punishment upon him for what he had done to the
Rabbins. Yet did he struggle with his numerous disorders, and still
had a desire to live, and hoped for recovery, and considered of several
methods of cure. Accordingly, he went over Jordan, and made use of those
hot baths at Callirrhoe, which ran into the lake Asphaltites, but are
themselves sweet enough to be drunk. And here the physicians thought
proper to bathe his whole body in warm oil, by letting it down into a
large vessel full of oil; whereupon his eyes failed him, and he came and
went as if he was dying; and as a tumult was then made by his servants,
at their voice he revived again. Yet did he after this despair of
recovery, and gave orders that each soldier should have fifty drachmae
a-piece, and that his commanders and friends should have great sums of
money given them.

6. He then returned back and came to Jericho, in such a melancholy state
of body as almost threatened him with present death, when he proceeded
to attempt a horrid wickedness; for he got together the most illustrious
men of the whole Jewish nation, out of every village, into a place
called the Hippodrome, and there shut them in. He then called for his
sister Salome, and her husband Alexas, and made this speech to them:
"I know well enough that the Jews will keep a festival upon my death
however, it is in my power to be mourned for on other accounts, and to
have a splendid funeral, if you will but be subservient to my commands.
Do you but take care to send soldiers to encompass these men that are
now in custody, and slay them immediately upon my death, and then all
Judea, and every family of them, will weep at it, whether they will or
no."

7. These were the commands he gave them; when there came letters from
his ambassadors at Rome, whereby information was given that Acme was put
to death at Caesar's command, and that Antipater was condemned to die;
however, they wrote withal, that if Herod had a mind rather to banish
him, Caesar permitted him so to do. So he for a little while revived,
and had a desire to live; but presently after he was overborne by his
pains, and was disordered by want of food, and by a convulsive cough,
and endeavored to prevent a natural, death; so he took an apple, and
asked for a knife for he used to pare apples and eat them; he then
looked round about to see that there was nobody to hinder him, and lift
up his right hand as if he would stab himself; but Achiabus, his first
cousin, came running to him, and held his hand, and hindered him from
so doing; on which occasion a very great lamentation was made in the
palace, as if the king were expiring. As soon as ever Antipater heard
that, he took courage, and with joy in his looks, besought his keepers,
for a sum of money, to loose him and let him go; but the principal
keeper of the prison did not only obstruct him in that his intention,
but ran and told the king what his design was; hereupon the king cried
out louder than his distemper would well bear, and immediately sent some
of his guards and slew Antipater; he also gave order to have him
buried at Hyrcanium, and altered his testament again, and therein made
Archelaus, his eldest son, and the brother of Antipas, his successor,
and made Antipas tetrarch.

8. So Herod, having survived the slaughter of his son five days, died,
having reigned thirty-four years since he had caused Antigonus to be
slain, and obtained his kingdom; but thirty-seven years since he had
been made king by the Romans. Now as for his fortune, it was prosperous
in all other respects, if ever any other man could be so, since, from a
private man, he obtained the kingdom, and kept it so long, and left
it to his own sons; but still in his domestic affairs he was a most
unfortunate man. Now, before the soldiers knew of his death, Salome and
her husband came out and dismissed those that were in bonds, whom the
king had commanded to be slain, and told them that he had altered his
mind, and would have every one of them sent to their own homes. When
these men were gone, Salome, told the soldiers [the king was dead], and
got them and the rest of the multitude together to an assembly, in the
amphitheater at Jericho, where Ptolemy, who was intrusted by the king
with his signet ring, came before them, and spake of the happiness the
king had attained, and comforted the multitude, and read the epistle
which had been left for the soldiers, wherein he earnestly exhorted them
to bear good-will to his successor; and after he had read the epistle,
he opened and read his testament, wherein Philip was to inherit
Trachonitis, and the neighboring countries, and Antipas was to be
tetrarch, as we said before, and Archelaus was made king. He had also
been commanded to carry Herod's ring to Caesar, and the settlements
he had made, sealed up, because Caesar was to be lord of all the
settlements he had made, and was to confirm his testament; and he
ordered that the dispositions he had made were to be kept as they were
in his former testament.

9. So there was an acclamation made to Archelaus, to congratulate him
upon his advancement; and the soldiers, with the multitude, went round
about in troops, and promised him their good-will, and besides, prayed
God to bless his government. After this, they betook themselves to
prepare for the king's funeral; and Archelaus omitted nothing of
magnificence therein, but brought out all the royal ornaments to augment
the pomp of the deceased. There was a bier all of gold, embroidered with
precious stones, and a purple bed of various contexture, with the dead
body upon it, covered with purple; and a diadem was put upon his head,
and a crown of gold above it, and a sceptre in his right hand; and near
to the bier were Herod's sons, and a multitude of his kindred; next to
which came his guards, and the regiment of Thracians, the Germans also
and Gauls, all accounted as if they were going to war; but the rest of
the army went foremost, armed, and following their captains and officers
in a regular manner; after whom five hundred of his domestic servants
and freed-men followed, with sweet spices in their hands: and the body
was carried two hundred furlongs, to Herodium, where he had given order
to be buried. And this shall suffice for the conclusion of the life of
Herod.

WAR BOOK 1 FOOTNOTES

1 (return) [ I see little difference in the several accounts in Josephus
about the Egyptian temple Onion, of which large complaints are made by
his commentators. Onias, it seems, hoped to have made it very like that
at Jerusalem, and of the same dimensions; and so he appears to have
really done, as far as he was able and thought proper. Of this temple,
see Antiq. B. XIII. ch. 3. sect. 1--3, and Of the War, B. VII. ch. 10.
sect. 8.]


2 (return) [ Why this John, the son of Simon, the high priest and
governor of the Jews, was called Hyrcanus, Josephus no where informs
us; nor is he called other than John at the end of the First Book of the
Maccabees. However, Sixtus Seuensis, when he gives us an epitome of
the Greek version of the book here abridged by Josephus, or of the
Chronicles of this John Hyrcanus, then extant, assures us that he was
called Hyrcanus from his conquest of one of that name. See Authent. Rec.
Part I. p. 207. But of this younger Antiochus, see Dean Aldrich's note
here.]


3 (return) [ Josephus here calls this Antiochus the last of the
Seleucidae, although there remained still a shadow of another king of
that family, Antiochus Asiaticus, or Commagenus, who reigned, or rather
lay hid, till Pompey quite turned him out, as Dean Aldrich here notes
from Appian and Justin.]


4 (return) [ Matthew 16:19; 18:18. Here we have the oldest and most
authentic Jewish exposition of binding and loosing, for punishing or
absolving men, not for declaring actions lawful or unlawful, as some
more modern Jews and Christians vainly pretend.]


5 (return) [ Strabo, B. XVI. p. 740, relates, that this Selene Cleopatra
was besieged by Tigranes, not in Ptolemais, as here, but after she had
left Syria, in Seleucia, a citadel in Mesopotamia; and adds, that when
he had kept her a while in prison, he put her to death. Dean Aldrich
supposes here that Strabo contradicts Josephus, which does not appear
to me; for although Josephus says both here and in the Antiquities, B.
XIII. ch. 16. sect. 4, that Tigranes besieged her now in Ptolemais,
and that he took the city, as the Antiquities inform us, yet does he
no where intimate that he now took the queen herself; so that both the
narrations of Strabo and Josephus may still be true notwithstanding.]


6 (return) [ That this Antipater, the father of Herod the Great was an
Idumean, as Josephus affirms here, see the note on Antiq. B. XIV. ch.
15. sect. 2. It is somewhat probable, as Hapercamp supposes, and partly
Spanheim also, that the Latin is here the truest; that Pompey did him
Hyrcanus, as he would have done the others from Aristobulus, sect. 6,
although his remarkable abstinence from the 2000 talents that were in
the Jewish temple, when he took it a little afterward, ch. 7. sect. 6,
and Antiq. B. XIV. ch. 4. sect. 4, will to Greek all which agree he did
not take them.]


7 (return) [ Of the famous palm trees and balsam about Jericho and
Engaddl, see the notes in Havercamp's edition, both here and B. II. ch.
9. sect. 1. They are somewhat too long to be transcribed in this place.]


8 (return) [ Thus says Tacitus: Cn. Pompelna first of all subdued the
Jews, and went into their temple, by right of conquest, Hist. B. V.
ch. 9. Nor did he touch any of its riches, as has been observed on the
parallel place of the Antiquities, B. XIV. ch. 4. sect. 4, out of Cicero
himself.]


9 (return) [ The coin of this Gadara, still extant, with its date from
this era, is a certain evidence of this its rebuilding by Pompey, as
Spanheim here assures us.]


10 (return) [ Take the like attestation to the truth of this submission
of Aretas, king of Arabia, to Scaurus the Roman general, in the words of
Dean Aldrich. "Hence [says he] is derived that old and famous Denarius
belonging to the Emillian family [represented in Havercamp's edition],
wherein Aretas appears in a posture of supplication, and taking hold of
a camel's bridle with his left hand, and with his right hand presenting
a branch of the frankincense tree, with this inscription, M. SCAURUS EX
S.C.; and beneath, REX ARETAS."]


11 (return) [ This citation is now wanting.]


12 (return) [ What is here noted by Hudson and Spanheim, that this grant
of leave to rebuild the walls of the cities of Judea was made by Julius
Caesar, not as here to Antipater, but to Hyrcanas, Antiq. B. XIV. ch.
8. sect. 5, has hardly an appearance of a contradiction; Antipater being
now perhaps considered only as Hyrcanus's deputy and minister; although
he afterwards made a cipher of Hyrcanus, and, under great decency of
behavior to him, took the real authority to himself.]


13 (return) [ Or twenty-five years of age. See note on Antiq. B. I. ch.
12. sect. 3; and on B. XIV. ch. 9. sect. 2; and Of the War, B. II.
ch. 11. sect. 6; and Polyb. B. XVII. p. 725. Many writers of the Roman
history give an account of this murder of Sextus Caesar, and of the war
of Apamia upon that occasion. They are cited in Dean Aldrich's note.]


14 (return) [ In the Antiquities, B. XIV. ch. 11. sect. 1, the duration
of the reign of Julius Caesar is three years six months; but here three
years seven months, beginning nightly, says Dean Aldrich, from his
second dictatorship. It is probable the real duration might be three
years and between six and seven months.]


15 (return) [ It appears evidently by Josephus's accounts, both here and
in his Antiquities, B. XIV. ch. 11. sect. 2, that this Cassius, one of
Caesar's murderers, was a bitter oppressor, and exactor of tribute
in Judea. These seven hundred talents amount to about three hundred
thousand pounds sterling, and are about half the yearly revenues of king
Herod afterwards. See the note on Antiq. B. XVII. ch. 11. sect. 4. It
also appears that Galilee then paid no more than one hundred talents, or
the seventh part of the entire sum to be levied in all the country.]


16 (return) [ Here we see that Cassius set tyrants over all Syria; so
that his assisting to destroy Caesar does not seem to have proceeded
from his true zeal for public liberty, but from a desire to be a tyrant
himself.]


17 (return) [ Phasaelus and Herod.]


18 (return) [ This large and noted wood, or woodland, belonging
to Carmel, called Apago by the Septuagint, is mentioned in the Old
Testament, 2 Kings 19:23; Isaiah 37:24, and by I Strabo, B. XVI. p. 758,
as both Aldrich and Spanheim here remark very pertinently.]


19 (return) [ These accounts, both here and Antiq. B. XIV. ch. 13. sect.
5, that the Parthians fought chiefly on horseback, and that only
some few of their soldiers were free-men, perfectly agree with Trogus
Pompeius, in Justin, B. XLI. 2, 3, as Dean Aldrich well observes on this
place.]


20 (return) [ Mariamac here, in the copies.]


21 (return) [ This Brentesium or Brundusium has coin still preserved, on
which is written, as Spanheim informs us.]


22 (return) [ This Dellius is famous, or rather infamous, in the history
of Mark Antony, as Spanheim and Aldrich here note, from the coins, from
Plutarch and Dio.]


23 (return) [ This Sepphoris, the metropolis of Galilee, so often
mentioned by Josephus, has coins still remaining, as Spanheim here
informs us.]


24 (return) [ This way of speaking, "after forty days," is interpreted
by Josephus himself, "on the fortieth day," Antiq. B. XIV. ch. 15. sect.
4. In like manner, when Josephus says, ch. 33. sect. 8, that Herod lived
"after" he had ordered Antipater to be slain "five days;" this is by
himself interpreted, Antiq. B. XVII. ch. 8. sect. 1, that he died "on
the fifth day afterward." So also what is in this book, ch. 13. sect.
1, "after two years," is, Antiq. B. XIV. ch. 13. sect. 3, "on the second
year." And Dean Aldrich here notes that this way of speaking is familiar
to Josephus.]


25 (return) [ This Samosata, the metropolis of Commagena, is well known
from its coins, as Spanheim here assures us. Dean Aldrich also confirms
what Josephus here notes, that Herod was a great means of taking the
city by Antony, and that from Plutarch and Dio.]


26 (return) [ That is, a woman, not, a man.]


27 (return) [ This death of Antigonus is confirmed by Plutarch and.
Straho; the latter of whom is cited for it by Josephus himself, Antiq.
B. XV. ch. 1. sect. 2, as Dean Aldrich here observes.]


28 (return) [ This ancient liberty of Tyre and Sidon under the Romans,
taken notice of by Josephus, both here and Antiq. B. XV. ch. 4. sect. 1,
is confirmed by the testimony of Sirabe, B. XVI. p. 757, as Dean Aldrich
remarks; although, as he justly adds, this liberty lasted but a little
while longer, when Augtus took it away from them.]


29 (return) [ This seventh year of the reign of Herod [from the conquest
or death of Antigonus], with the great earthquake in the beginning of
the same spring, which are here fully implied to be not much before the
fight at Actium, between Octavius and Antony, and which is known from
the Roman historians to have been in the beginning of September, in the
thirty-first year before the Christian era, determines the chronology
of Josephus as to the reign of Herod, viz. that he began in the year 37,
beyond rational contradiction. Nor is it quite unworthy of our notice,
that this seventh year of the reign of Herod, or the thirty-first before
the Christian era, contained the latter part of a Sabbatic year, on
which Sabbatic year, therefore, it is plain this great earthquake
happened in Judea.]


30 (return) [ This speech of Herod is set down twice by Josephus, here
and Antiq. B. XV. ch. 5. sect. 3, to the very same purpose, but by no
means in the same words; whence it appears that the sense was Herod's,
but the composition Josephus's.]


31 (return) [ Since Josephus, both here and in his Antiq. B. XV. ch.
7. sect. 3, reckons Gaza, which had been a free city, among the cities
given Herod by Augustus, and yet implies that Herod had made Costobarus
a governor of it before, Antiq. B. XV. ch. 7. sect. 9, Hardain has some
pretense for saying that Josephus here contradicted himself. But perhaps
Herod thought he had sufficient authority to put a governor into Gaza,
after he was made tetrarch or king, in times of war, before the city was
entirely delivered into his hands by Augustus.]


32 (return) [ This fort was first built, as it is supposed, by John
Hyrcanus; see Prid. at the year 107; and called "Baris," the Tower or
Citadel. It was afterwards rebuilt, with great improvements, by Herod,
under the government of Antonius, and was named from him "the Tower of
Antoni;" and about the time when Herod rebuilt the temple, he seems to
have put his last hand to it. See Antiq. B. XVIII. ch. 5. sect. 4; Of
the War, B. I. ch. 3. sect. 3; ch. 5. sect. 4. It lay on the northwest
side of the temple, and was a quarter as large.]


33 (return) [ That Josephus speaks truth, when he assures us that the
haven of this Cesarea was made by Herod not less, nay rather larger,
than that famous haven at Athens, called the Pyrecum, will appear, says
Dean Aldrich, to him who compares the descriptions of that at Athens in
Thucydides and Pausanias, with this of Cesarea in Josephus here, and in
the Antiq. B. XV. ch. 9. sect. 6, and B. XVII. ch. 9. sect. 1.]


34 (return) [ These buildings of cities by the name of Caesar, and
institution of solemn games in honor of Augustus Caesar, as here, and
in the Antiquities, related of Herod by Josephus, the Roman historians
attest to, as things then frequent in the provinces of that empire, as
Dean Aldrich observes on this chapter.]


35 (return) [ There were two cities, or citadels, called Herodium, in
Judea, and both mentioned by Josephus, not only here, but Antiq. B. XIV.
ch. 13. sect. 9; B. XV. ch. 9. sect. 6; Of the War, B. I. ch. 13. sect.
8; B. III. ch. 3. sect. 5. One of them was two hundred, and the other
sixty furlongs distant from Jerusalem. One of them is mentioned by
Pliny, Hist. Nat. B. V. ch. 14., as Dean Aldrich observes here.]


36 (return) [ Here seems to be a small defect in the copies, which
describe the wild beasts which were hunted in a certain country by
Herod, without naming any such country at all.]


37 (return) [ Here is either a defect or a great mistake in Josephus's
present copies or memory; for Mariamne did not now reproach Herod with
this his first injunction to Joseph to kill her, if he himself were
slain by Antony, but that he had given the like command a second time
to Soemus also, when he was afraid of being slain by Augustus. Antiq. B.
XV. ch. 3. sect. 5, etc.]


38 (return) [ That this island Eleusa, afterward called Sebaste,
near Cilicia, had in it the royal palace of this Archelaus, king of
Cappadocia, Strabo testifies, B. XV. p. 671. Stephanus of Byzantiam
also calls it "an island of Cilicia, which is now Sebaste;" both whose
testimonies are pertinently cited here by Dr. Hudson. See the same
history, Antiq. B. XVI. ch. 10. sect. 7.]


39 (return) [ That it was an immemorial custom among the Jews, and their
forefathers, the patriarchs, to have sometimes more wives or wives and
concubines, than one at the same the and that this polygamy was not
directly forbidden in the law of Moses is evident; but that polygamy
was ever properly and distinctly permitted in that law of Moses, in the
places here cited by Dean Aldrich, Deuteronomy 17:16, 17, or 21:15, or
indeed any where else, does not appear to me. And what our Savior says
about the common Jewish divorces, which may lay much greater claim to
such a permission than polygamy, seems to me true in this case also;
that Moses, "for the hardness of their hearts," suffered them to have
several wives at the same time, but that "from the beginning it was not
so," Matthew 19:8; Mark 10:5.]


40 (return) [ This vile fellow, Eurycles the Lacedemonian, seems to
have been the same who is mentioned by Plutarch, as [twenty-live years
before] a companion to Mark Antony, and as living with Herod; whence he
might easily insinuate himself into the acquaintance of Herod's sons,
Antipater and Alexander, as Usher, Hudson, and Spanheim justly suppose.
The reason why his being a Spartan rendered him acceptable to the Jews
as we here see he was, is visible from the public records of the Jews
and Spartans, owning those Spartans to be of kin to the Jews, and
derived from their common ancestor Abraham, the first patriarch of the
Jewish nation, Antiq. B. XII. ch. 4. sect. 10; B. XIII. ch. 5. sect. 8;
and 1 Macc. 12:7.]


41 (return) [ See the preceding note.]


42 (return) [ Dean Aldrich takes notice here, that these nine wives of
Herod were alive at the same time; and that if the celebrated Mariamne,
who was now dead, be reckoned, those wives were in all ten. Yet it is
remarkable that he had no more than fifteen children by them all.]


43 (return) [ To prevent confusion, it may not be amiss, with Dean
Aldrich, to distinguish between four Josephs in the history of Herod.
1. Joseph, Herod's uncle, and the [second] husband of his sister Salome,
slain by Herod, on account of Mariamne. 2. Joseph, Herod's quaestor, or
treasurer, slain on the same account. 3. Joseph, Herod's brother, slain
in battle against Antigonus. 4. Joseph, Herod's nephew, the husband of
Olympias, mentioned in this place.]


44 (return) [ These daughters of Herod, whom Pheroras's wife affronted,
were Salome and Roxana, two virgins, who were born to him of his two
wives, Elpide and Phedra. See Herod's genealogy, Antiq. B. XVII. ch. 1.
sect. 3.]


45 (return) [ This strange obstinacy of Pheroras in retaining his wife,
who was one of a low family, and refusing to marry one nearly related to
Herod, though he so earnestly desired it, as also that wife's admission
to the counsels of the other great court ladies, together with Herod's
own importunity as to Pheroras's divorce and other marriage, all so
remarkable here, or in the Antiquities XVII. ch. 2. sect. 4; and ch. 3.
be well accounted for, but on the supposal that Pheroras believed, and
Herod suspected, that the Pharisees' prediction, as if the crown of
Judea should be translated from Herod to Pheroras's posterity and that
most probably to Pheroras's posterity by this his wife, also would prove
true. See Antiq. B. XVII. ch. 2. sect. 4; and ch. 3. sect. 1.]


46 (return) [ This Tarentum has coins still extant, as Reland informs us
here in his note.]


47 (return) [ A lover of his father.]


48 (return) [ Since in these two sections we have an evident account of
the Jewish opinions in the days of Josephus, about a future happy state,
and the resurrection of the dead, as in the New Testament, John 11:24,
I shall here refer to the other places in Josephus, before he became a
catholic Christian, which concern the same matters. Of the War, B. II.
ch. 8. sect. 10, 11; B. III. ch. 8. sect. 4; B. VII. ch. 6. sect. 7;
Contr. Apion, B. II. sect. 30; where we may observe, that none of these
passages are in his Books of Antiquities, written peculiarly for the use
of the Gentiles, to whom he thought it not proper to insist on topics
so much out of their way as these were. Nor is this observation to be
omitted here, especially on account of the sensible difference we
have now before us in Josephus's reason of the used by the Rabbins to
persuade their scholars to hazard their lives for the vindication of
God's law against images, by Moses, as well as of the answers those
scholars made to Herod, when they were caught, and ready to die for
the same; I mean as compared with the parallel arguments and answers
represented in the Antiquities, B. XVII. ch. 6. sect, 2, 3. A like
difference between Jewish and Gentile notions the reader will find in my
notes on Antiquities, B. III. ch. 7. sect. 7; B. XV. ch. 9. sect. 1. See
the like also in the case of the three Jewish sects in the Antiquities,
B. XIII. ch. 5. sect. 9, and ch. 10. sect. 4, 5; B. XVIII. ch. 1. sect.
5; and compared with this in his Wars of the Jews, B. II. ch. 8. sect.
2-14. Nor does St. Paul himself reason to Gentiles at Athens, Acts
17:16-34, as he does to Jews in his Epistles.]







BOOK II.


     Containing The Interval Of Sixty-Nine Years.

     From The Death Of Herod Till Vespasian Was Sent To Subdue
     The Jews By Nero.




CHAPTER 1.


     Archelaus Makes A Funeral Feast For The People, On The
     Account Of Herod. After Which A Great Tumult Is Raised By
     The Multitude And He Sends The Soldiers Out Upon Them, Who
     Destroy About Three Thousand Of Them.

1. Now the necessity which Archelaus was under of taking a journey to
Rome was the occasion of new disturbances; for when he had mourned for
his father seven days, 1 and had given a very expensive funeral feast to
the multitude, [which custom is the occasion of poverty to many of the
Jews, because they are forced to feast the multitude; for if any one
omits it, he is not esteemed a holy person,] he put on a white garment,
and went up to the temple, where the people accosted him with various
acclamations. He also spake kindly to the multitude from an elevated
seat and a throne of gold, and returned them thanks for the zeal they
had shown about his father's funeral, and the submission they had made
to him, as if he were already settled in the kingdom; but he told them
withal, that he would not at present take upon him either the authority
of a king, or the names thereto belonging, until Caesar, who is made
lord of this whole affair by the testament, confirm the succession; for
that when the soldiers would have set the diadem on his head at Jericho,
he would not accept of it; but that he would make abundant requitals,
not to the soldiers only, but to the people, for their alacrity and
good-will to him, when the superior lords [the Romans] should have given
him a complete title to the kingdom; for that it should be his study to
appear in all things better than his father.

2. Upon this the multitude were pleased, and presently made a trial of
what he intended, by asking great things of him; for some made a clamor
that he would ease them in their taxes; others, that he would take off
the duties upon commodities; and some, that he would loose those
that were in prison; in all which cases he answered readily to their
satisfaction, in order to get the good-will of the multitude; after
which he offered [the proper] sacrifices, and feasted with his friends.
And here it was that a great many of those that desired innovations
came in crowds towards the evening, and began then to mourn on their own
account, when the public mourning for the king was over. These lamented
those that were put to death by Herod, because they had cut down the
golden eagle that had been over the gate of the temple. Nor was this
mourning of a private nature, but the lamentations were very great, the
mourning solemn, and the weeping such as was loudly heard all over the
city, as being for those men who had perished for the laws of their
country, and for the temple. They cried out that a punishment ought to
be inflicted for these men upon those that were honored by Herod; and
that, in the first place, the man whom he had made high priest should
be deprived; and that it was fit to choose a person of greater piety and
purity than he was.

3. At these clamors Archelaus was provoked, but restrained himself from
taking vengeance on the authors, on account of the haste he was in of
going to Rome, as fearing lest, upon his making war on the multitude,
such an action might detain him at home. Accordingly, he made trial to
quiet the innovators by persuasion, rather than by force, and sent his
general in a private way to them, and by him exhorted them to be quiet.
But the seditious threw stones at him, and drove him away, as he came
into the temple, and before he could say any thing to them. The like
treatment they showed to others, who came to them after him, many of
which were sent by Archelaus, in order to reduce them to sobriety, and
these answered still on all occasions after a passionate manner; and it
openly appeared that they would not be quiet, if their numbers were but
considerable. And indeed, at the feast of unleavened bread, which was
now at hand, and is by the Jews called the Passover, and used to be
celebrated with a great number of sacrifices, an innumerable multitude
of the people came out of the country to worship; some of these stood
in the temple bewailing the Rabbins [that had been put to death],
and procured their sustenance by begging, in order to support their
sedition. At this Archelaus was affrighted, and privately sent a
tribune, with his cohort of soldiers, upon them, before the disease
should spread over the whole multitude, and gave orders that they should
constrain those that began the tumult, by force, to be quiet. At these
the whole multitude were irritated, and threw stones at many of the
soldiers, and killed them; but the tribune fled away wounded, and had
much ado to escape so. After which they betook themselves to their
sacrifices, as if they had done no mischief; nor did it appear to
Archelaus that the multitude could be restrained without bloodshed; so
he sent his whole army upon them, the footmen in great multitudes, by
the way of the city, and the horsemen by the way of the plain, who,
falling upon them on the sudden, as they were offering their sacrifices,
destroyed about three thousand of them; but the rest of the multitude
were dispersed upon the adjoining mountains: these were followed by
Archelaus's heralds, who commanded every one to retire to their own
homes, whither they all went, and left the festival.






CHAPTER 2.


     Archelaus Goes To Rome With A Great Number Of His Kindred.
     He Is There Accused Before Caesar By Antipater; But Is
     Superior To His Accusers In Judgment By The Means Of That
     Defense Which Nicolaus Made For Him.

1. Archelaus went down now to the sea-side, with his mother and his
friends, Poplas, and Ptolemy, and Nicolaus, and left behind him Philip,
to be his steward in the palace, and to take care of his domestic
affairs. Salome went also along with him with her sons, as did also the
king's brethren and sons-in-law. These, in appearance, went to give him
all the assistance they were able, in order to secure his succession,
but in reality to accuse him for his breach of the laws by what he had
done at the temple.

2. But as they were come to Cesarea, Sabinus, the procurator of Syria,
met them; he was going up to Judea, to secure Herod's effects; but
Varus, [president of Syria,] who was come thither, restrained him from
going any farther. This Varus Archelaus had sent for, by the earnest
entreaty of Ptolemy. At this time, indeed, Sabinus, to gratify Varus,
neither went to the citadels, nor did he shut up the treasuries where
his father's money was laid up, but promised that he would lie still,
until Caesar should have taken cognizance of the affair. So he abode at
Cesarea; but as soon as those that were his hinderance were gone,
when Varus was gone to Antioch, and Archelaus was sailed to Rome, he
immediately went on to Jerusalem, and seized upon the palace. And when
he had called for the governors of the citadels, and the stewards [of
the king's private affairs], he tried to sift out the accounts of the
money, and to take possession of the citadels. But the governors of
those citadels were not unmindful of the commands laid upon them by
Archelaus, and continued to guard them, and said the custody of them
rather belonged to Caesar than to Archelaus.

3. In the mean time, Antipas went also to Rome, to strive for the
kingdom, and to insist that the former testament, wherein he was named
to be king, was valid before the latter testament. Salome had also
promised to assist him, as had many of Archelaus's kindred, who sailed
along with Archelaus himself also. He also carried along with him his
mother, and Ptolemy, the brother of Nicolaus, who seemed one of great
weight, on account of the great trust Herod put in him, he having been
one of his most honored friends. However, Antipas depended chiefly
upon Ireneus, the orator; upon whose authority he had rejected such as
advised him to yield to Archelaus, because he was his elder brother, and
because the second testament gave the kingdom to him. The inclinations
also of all Archelaus's kindred, who hated him, were removed to Antipas,
when they came to Rome; although in the first place every one rather
desired to live under their own laws [without a king], and to be under
a Roman governor; but if they should fail in that point, these desired
that Antipas might be their king.

4. Sabinus did also afford these his assistance to the same purpose by
letters he sent, wherein he accused Archelaus before Caesar, and highly
commended Antipas. Salome also, and those with her, put the crimes which
they accused Archelaus of in order, and put them into Caesar's hands;
and after they had done that, Archelaus wrote down the reasons of his
claim, and, by Ptolemy, sent in his father's ring, and his father's
accounts. And when Caesar had maturely weighed by himself what both had
to allege for themselves, as also had considered of the great burden of
the kingdom, and largeness of the revenues, and withal the number of the
children Herod had left behind him, and had moreover read the letters he
had received from Varus and Sabinus on this occasion, he assembled the
principal persons among the Romans together, [in which assembly Caius,
the son of Agrippa, and his daughter Julias, but by himself adopted
for his own son, sat in the first seat,] and gave the pleaders leave to
speak.

5. Then stood up Salome's son, Antipater, [who of all Archelaus's
antagonists was the shrewdest pleader,] and accused him in the following
speech: That Archelaus did in words contend for the kingdom, but that
in deeds he had long exercised royal authority, and so did but insult
Caesar in desiring to be now heard on that account, since he had not
staid for his determination about the succession, and since he had
suborned certain persons, after Herod's death, to move for putting the
diadem upon his head; since he had set himself down in the throne, and
given answers as a king, and altered the disposition of the army, and
granted to some higher dignities; that he had also complied in all
things with the people in the requests they had made to him as to their
king, and had also dismissed those that had been put into bonds by his
father for most important reasons. Now, after all this, he desires the
shadow of that royal authority, whose substance he had already seized to
himself, and so hath made Caesar lord, not of things, but of words. He
also reproached him further, that his mourning for his father was only
pretended, while he put on a sad countenance in the day time, but drank
to great excess in the night; from which behavior, he said, the late
disturbance among the multitude came, while they had an indignation
thereat. And indeed the purport of his whole discourse was to aggravate
Archelaus's crime in slaying such a multitude about the temple, which
multitude came to the festival, but were barbarously slain in the midst
of their own sacrifices; and he said there was such a vast number of
dead bodies heaped together in the temple, as even a foreign war, that
should come upon them [suddenly], before it was denounced, could not
have heaped together. And he added, that it was the foresight his father
had of that his barbarity which made him never give him any hopes of the
kingdom, but when his mind was more infirm than his body, and he was not
able to reason soundly, and did not well know what was the character of
that son, whom in his second testament he made his successor; and this
was done by him at a time when he had no complaints to make of him whom
he had named before, when he was sound in body, and when his mind was
free from all passion. That, however, if any one should suppose Herod's
judgment, when he was sick, was superior to that at another time, yet
had Archelaus forfeited his kingdom by his own behavior, and those his
actions, which were contrary to the law, and to its disadvantage.
Or what sort of a king will this man be, when he hath obtained the
government from Caesar, who hath slain so many before he hath obtained
it!

6. When Antipater had spoken largely to this purpose, and had produced a
great number of Archelaus's kindred as witnesses, to prove every part of
the accusation, he ended his discourse. Then stood up Nicolaus to plead
for Archelaus. He alleged that the slaughter in the temple could not
be avoided; that those that were slain were become enemies not to
Archelaus's kingdom, only, but to Caesar, who was to determine about
him. He also demonstrated that Archelaus's accusers had advised him
to perpetrate other things of which he might have been accused. But he
insisted that the latter testament should, for this reason, above all
others, be esteemed valid, because Herod had therein appointed Caesar to
be the person who should confirm the succession; for he who showed such
prudence as to recede from his own power, and yield it up to the lord
of the world, cannot be supposed mistaken in his judgment about him
that was to be his heir; and he that so well knew whom to choose for
arbitrator of the succession could not be unacquainted with him whom he
chose for his successor.

7. When Nicolaus had gone through all he had to say, Archelaus came,
and fell down before Caesar's knees, without any noise;--upon which he
raised him up, after a very obliging manner, and declared that truly
he was worthy to succeed his father. However, he still made no firm
determination in his case; but when he had dismissed those assessors
that had been with him that day, he deliberated by himself about the
allegations which he had heard, whether it were fit to constitute any
of those named in the testaments for Herod's successor, or whether the
government should be parted among all his posterity, and this because of
the number of those that seemed to stand in need of support therefrom.






CHAPTER 3.


     The Jews Fight A Great Battle With Sabinus's Soldiers, And A
     Great Destruction Is Made At Jerusalem.

1. Now before Caesar had determined any thing about these affairs,
Malthace, Arehelaus's mother, fell sick and died. Letters also were
brought out of Syria from Varus, about a revolt of the Jews. This was
foreseen by Varus, who accordingly, after Archelaus was sailed, went
up to Jerusalem to restrain the promoters of the sedition, since it was
manifest that the nation would not be at rest; so he left one of those
legions which he brought with him out of Syria in the city, and went
himself to Antioch. But Sabinus came, after he was gone, and gave them
an occasion of making innovations; for he compelled the keepers of the
citadels to deliver them up to him, and made a bitter search after the
king's money, as depending not only on the soldiers which were left by
Varus, but on the multitude of his own servants, all which he armed and
used as the instruments of his covetousness. Now when that feast, which
was observed after seven weeks, and which the Jews called Pentecost, [i.
e. the 50th day,] was at hand, its name being taken from the number
of the days [after the passover], the people got together, but not on
account of the accustomed Divine worship, but of the indignation they
had ['at the present state of affairs']. Wherefore an immense multitude
ran together, out of Galilee, and Idumea, and Jericho, and Perea, that
was beyond Jordan; but the people that naturally belonged to Judea
itself were above the rest, both in number, and in the alacrity of the
men. So they distributed themselves into three parts, and pitched their
camps in three places; one at the north side of the temple, another at
the south side, by the Hippodrome, and the third part were at the palace
on the west. So they lay round about the Romans on every side, and
besieged them.

2. Now Sabinus was affrighted, both at their multitude, and at their
courage, and sent messengers to Varus continually, and besought him to
come to his succor quickly; for that if he delayed, his legion would be
cut to pieces. As for Sabinus himself, he got up to the highest tower
of the fortress, which was called Phasaelus; it is of the same name with
Herod's brother, who was destroyed by the Parthians; and then he made
signs to the soldiers of that legion to attack the enemy; for his
astonishment was so great, that he durst not go down to his own men.
Hereupon the soldiers were prevailed upon, and leaped out into the
temple, and fought a terrible battle with the Jews; in which, while
there were none over their heads to distress them, they were too hard
for them, by their skill, and the others' want of skill, in war; but
when once many of the Jews had gotten up to the top of the cloisters,
and threw their darts downwards, upon the heads of the Romans,
there were a great many of them destroyed. Nor was it easy to avenge
themselves upon those that threw their weapons from on high, nor was it
more easy for them to sustain those who came to fight them hand to hand.

3. Since therefore the Romans were sorely afflicted by both these
circumstances, they set fire to the cloisters, which were works to be
admired, both on account of their magnitude and costliness. Whereupon
those that were above them were presently encompassed with the flame,
and many of them perished therein; as many of them also were destroyed
by the enemy, who came suddenly upon them; some of them also threw
themselves down from the walls backward, and some there were who, from
the desperate condition they were in, prevented the fire, by killing
themselves with their own swords; but so many of them as crept out from
the walls, and came upon the Romans, were easily mastered by them, by
reason of the astonishment they were under; until at last some of the
Jews being destroyed, and others dispersed by the terror they were in,
the soldiers fell upon the treasure of God, which was now deserted, and
plundered about four hundred talents, Of which sum Sabinus got together
all that was not carried away by the soldiers.

4. However, this destruction of the works [about the temple], and of the
men, occasioned a much greater number, and those of a more warlike sort,
to get together, to oppose the Romans. These encompassed the palace
round, and threatened to deploy all that were in it, unless they went
their ways quickly; for they promised that Sabinus should come to no
harm, if he would go out with his legion. There were also a great many
of the king's party who deserted the Romans, and assisted the Jews; yet
did the most warlike body of them all, who were three thousand of the
men of Sebaste, go over to the Romans. Rufus also, and Gratus, their
captains, did the same, [Gratus having the foot of the king's party
under him, and Rufus the horse,] each of whom, even without the forces
under them, were of great weight, on account of their strength and
wisdom, which turn the scales in war. Now the Jews in the siege, and
tried to break down walls of the fortress, and cried out to Sabinus and
his party, that they should go their ways, and not prove a hinderance to
them, now they hoped, after a long time, to recover that ancient liberty
which their forefathers had enjoyed. Sabinus indeed was well contented
to get out of the danger he was in, but he distrusted the assurances the
Jews gave him, and suspected such gentle treatment was but a bait laid
as a snare for them: this consideration, together with the hopes he had
of succor from Varus, made him bear the siege still longer.






CHAPTER 4.


     Herod's Veteran Soldiers Become Tumultuous. The Robberies Of
     Judas. Simon And Athronoeus Take The Name Of King Upon Them.

1. At this time there were great disturbances in the country, and that
in many places; and the opportunity that now offered itself induced a
great many to set up for kings. And indeed in Idumea two thousand of
Herod's veteran soldiers got together, and armed and fought against
those of the king's party; against whom Achiabus, the king's first
cousin, fought, and that out of some of the places that were the most
strongly fortified; but so as to avoid a direct conflict with them in
the plains. In Sepphoris also, a city of Galilee, there was one Judas
[the son of that arch-robber Hezekias, who formerly overran the country,
and had been subdued by king Herod]; this man got no small multitude
together, and brake open the place where the royal armor was laid up,
and armed those about him, and attacked those that were so earnest to
gain the dominion.

2. In Perea also, Simon, one of the servants to the king, relying upon
the handsome appearance and tallness of his body, put a diadem upon his
own head also; he also went about with a company of robbers that he had
gotten together, and burnt down the royal palace that was at Jericho,
and many other costly edifices besides, and procured himself very easily
spoils by rapine, as snatching them out of the fire. And he had soon
burnt down all the fine edifices, if Gratus, the captain of the foot
of the king's party, had not taken the Trachonite archers, and the
most warlike of Sebaste, and met the man. His footmen were slain in the
battle in abundance; Gratus also cut to pieces Simon himself, as he was
flying along a strait valley, when he gave him an oblique stroke upon
his neck, as he ran away, and brake it. The royal palaces that were
near Jordan at Betharamptha were also burnt down by some other of the
seditious that came out of Perea.

3. At this time it was that a certain shepherd ventured to set himself
up for a king; he was called Athrongeus. It was his strength of body
that made him expect such a dignity, as well as his soul, which despised
death; and besides these qualifications, he had four brethren like
himself. He put a troop of armed men under each of these his brethren,
and made use of them as his generals and commanders, when he made his
incursions, while he did himself act like a king, and meddled only with
the more important affairs; and at this time he put a diadem about his
head, and continued after that to overrun the country for no little time
with his brethren, and became their leader in killing both the Romans
and those of the king's party; nor did any Jew escape him, if any gain
could accrue to him thereby. He once ventured to encompass a whole troop
of Romans at Emmaus, who were carrying corn and weapons to their legion;
his men therefore shot their arrows and darts, and thereby slew their
centurion Arius, and forty of the stoutest of his men, while the rest
of them, who were in danger of the same fate, upon the coming of Gratus,
with those of Sebaste, to their assistance, escaped. And when these
men had thus served both their own countrymen and foreigners, and that
through this whole war, three of them were, after some time, subdued;
the eldest by Archelaus, the two next by falling into the hands of
Gratus and Ptolemeus; but the fourth delivered himself up to Archelaus,
upon his giving him his right hand for his security. However, this their
end was not till afterward, while at present they filled all Judea with
a piratic war.






CHAPTER 5.


     Varus Composes The Tumults In Judea And Crucifies About Two
     Thousand Of The Seditious.

1. Upon Varus's reception of the letters that were written by Sabinus
and the captains, he could not avoid being afraid for the whole legion
[he had left there]. So he made haste to their relief, and took with
him the other two legions, with the four troops of horsemen to them
belonging, and marched to Ptolenlais; having given orders for the
auxiliaries that were sent by the kings and governors of cities to
meet him there. Moreover, he received from the people of Berytus, as he
passed through their city, fifteen hundred armed men. Now as soon as the
other body of auxiliaries were come to Ptolemais, as well as Aretas the
Arabian, [who, out of the hatred he bore to Herod, brought a great army
of horse and foot,] Varus sent a part of his army presently to Galilee,
which lay near to Ptolemais, and Caius, one of his friends, for their
captain. This Caius put those that met him to flight, and took the city
Sepphoris, and burnt it, and made slaves of its inhabitants; but as for
Varus himself, he marched to Samaria with his whole army, where he did
not meddle with the city itself, because he found that it had made no
commotion during these troubles, but pitched his camp about a certain
village which was called Aras. It belonged to Ptolemy, and on that
account was plundered by the Arabians, who were very angry even at
Herod's friends also. He thence marched on to the village Sampho,
another fortified place, which they plundered, as they had done the
other. As they carried off all the money they lighted upon belonging
to the public revenues, all was now full of fire and blood-shed, and
nothing could resist the plunders of the Arabians. Emnaus was also
burnt, upon the flight of its inhabitants, and this at the command of
Varus, out of his rage at the slaughter of those that were about Arias.

2. Thence he marched on to Jerusalem, and as soon as he was but seen by
the Jews, he made their camps disperse themselves; they also went away,
and fled up and down the country. But the citizens received him, and
cleared themselves of having any hand in this revolt, and said that
they had raised no commotions, but had only been forced to admit the
multitude, because of the festival, and that they were rather besieged
together with the Romans, than assisted those that had revolted. There
had before this met him Joseph, the first cousin of Archelaus, and
Gratus, together with Rufus, who led those of Sebaste, as well as the
king's army: there also met him those of the Roman legion, armed after
their accustomed manner; for as to Sabinus, he durst not come into
Varus's sight, but was gone out of the city before this, to the
sea-side. But Varus sent a part of his army into the country, against
those that had been the authors of this commotion, and as they caught
great numbers of them, those that appeared to have been the least
concerned in these tumults he put into custody, but such as were the
most guilty he crucified; these were in number about two thousand.

3. He was also informed that there continued in Idumea ten thousand
men still in arms; but when he found that the Arabians did not act like
auxiliaries, but managed the war according to their own passions, and
did mischief to the country otherwise than he intended, and this out of
their hatred to Herod, he sent them away, but made haste, with his own
legions, to march against those that had revolted; but these, by the
advice of Achiabus, delivered themselves up to him before it came to a
battle. Then did Varus forgive the multitude their offenses, but sent
their captains to Caesar to be examined by him. Now Caesar forgave the
rest, but gave orders that certain of the king's relations [for some of
those that were among them were Herod's kinsmen] should be put to death,
because they had engaged in a war against a king of their own family.
When therefore Varus had settled matters at Jerusalem after this manner,
and had left the former legion there as a garrison, he returned to
Antioch.






CHAPTER 6.


     The Jews Greatly Complain Of Archelaus And Desire That They
     May Be Made Subject To Roman Governors. But When Caesar Had
     Heard What They Had To Say, He Distributed Herod's Dominions
     Among His Sons According To His Own Pleasure.

1. But now came another accusation from the Jews against Archelaus at
Rome, which he was to answer to. It was made by those ambassadors who,
before the revolt, had come, by Varus's permission, to plead for the
liberty of their country; those that came were fifty in number, but
there were more than eight thousand of the Jews at Rome who supported
them. And when Caesar had assembled a council of the principal Romans in
Apollo's 2 temple, that was in the palace, [this was what he had himself
built and adorned, at a vast expense,] the multitude of the Jews stood
with the ambassadors, and on the other side stood Archelaus, with his
friends; but as for the kindred of Archelaus, they stood on neither
side; for to stand on Archelaus's side, their hatred to him, and envy at
him, would not give them leave, while yet they were afraid to be seen by
Caesar with his accusers. Besides these, there were present Archelaus's
brother Philip, being sent thither beforehand, out of kindness by
Varus, for two reasons: the one was this, that he might be assisting
to Archelaus; and the other was this, that in case Caesar should make
a distribution of what Herod possessed among his posterity, he might
obtain some share of it.

2. And now, upon the permission that was given the accusers to speak,
they, in the first place, went over Herod's breaches of their law, and
said that he was not a king, but the most barbarous of all tyrants, and
that they had found him to be such by the sufferings they underwent from
him; that when a very great number had been slain by him, those that
were left had endured such miseries, that they called those that
were dead happy men; that he had not only tortured the bodies of his
subjects, but entire cities, and had done much harm to the cities of his
own country, while he adorned those that belonged to foreigners; and he
shed the blood of Jews, in order to do kindnesses to those people that
were out of their bounds; that he had filled the nation full of poverty,
and of the greatest iniquity, instead of that happiness and those laws
which they had anciently enjoyed; that, in short, the Jews had borne
more calamities from Herod, in a few years, than had their forefathers
during all that interval of time that had passed since they had come out
of Babylon, and returned home, in the reign of Xerxes 3 that, however,
the nation was come to so low a condition, by being inured to hardships,
that they submitted to his successor of their own accord, though he
brought them into bitter slavery; that accordingly they readily called
Archelaus, though he was the son of so great a tyrant, king, after the
decease of his father, and joined with him in mourning for the death of
Herod, and in wishing him good success in that his succession; while
yet this Archelaus, lest he should be in danger of not being thought the
genuine son of Herod, began his reign with the murder of three thousand
citizens; as if he had a mind to offer so many bloody sacrifices to God
for his government, and to fill the temple with the like number of dead
bodies at that festival: that, however, those that were left after so
many miseries, had just reason to consider now at last the calamities
they had undergone, and to oppose themselves, like soldiers in war, to
receive those stripes upon their faces [but not upon their backs, as
hitherto]. Whereupon they prayed that the Romans would have compassion
upon the [poor] remains of Judea, and not expose what was left of them
to such as barbarously tore them to pieces, and that they would join
their country to Syria, and administer the government by their own
commanders, whereby it would [soon] be demonstrated that those who are
now under the calumny of seditious persons, and lovers of war, know how
to bear governors that are set over them, if they be but tolerable ones.
So the Jews concluded their accusation with this request. Then rose up
Nicolaus, and confuted the accusations which were brought against the
kings, and himself accused the Jewish nation, as hard to be ruled, and
as naturally disobedient to kings. He also reproached all those kinsmen
of Archelaus who had left him, and were gone over to his accusers.

3. So Caesar, after he had heard both sides, dissolved the assembly for
that time; but a few days afterward, he gave the one half of Herod's
kingdom to Archelaus, by the name of Ethnarch, and promised to make him
king also afterward, if he rendered himself worthy of that dignity. But
as to the other half, he divided it into two tetrarchies, and gave them
to two other sons of Herod, the one of them to Philip, and the other to
that Antipas who contested the kingdom with Archelaus. Under this
last was Perea and Galilee, with a revenue of two hundred talents; but
Batanea, and Trachonitis, and Auranitis, and certain parts of Zeno's
house about Jamnia, with a revenue of a hundred talents, were made
subject to Philip; while Idumea, and all Judea, and Samaria were parts
of the ethnarchy of Archelaus, although Samaria was eased of one quarter
of its taxes, out of regard to their not having revolted with the rest
of the nation. He also made subject to him the following cities, viz.
Strato's Tower, and Sebaste, and Joppa, and Jerusalem; but as to the
Grecian cities, Gaza, and Gadara, and Hippos, he cut them off from the
kingdom, and added them to Syria. Now the revenue of the country that
was given to Archelaus was four hundred talents. Salome also, besides
what the king had left her in his testaments, was now made mistress of
Jamnia, and Ashdod, and Phasaelis. Caesar did moreover bestow upon her
the royal palace of Ascalon; by all which she got together a revenue of
sixty talents; but he put her house under the ethnarchy of Archelaus.
And for the rest of Herod's offspring, they received what was bequeathed
to them in his testaments; but, besides that, Caesar granted to Herod's
two virgin daughters five hundred thousand [drachmae] of silver, and
gave them in marriage to the sons of Pheroras: but after this family
distribution, he gave between them what had been bequeathed to him by
Herod, which was a thousand talents, reserving to himself only some
inconsiderable presents, in honor of the deceased.






CHAPTER 7.


     The History Of The Spurious Alexander. Archelaus Is Banished
     And Glaphyra Dies, After What Was To Happen To Both Of Them
     Had Been Showed Them In Dreams.

1. In the meantime, there was a man, who was by birth a Jew, but brought
up at Sidon with one of the Roman freed-men, who falsely pretended,
on account of the resemblance of their countenances, that he was that
Alexander who was slain by Herod. This man came to Rome, in hopes of not
being detected. He had one who was his assistant, of his own nation, and
who knew all the affairs of the kingdom, and instructed him to say how
those that were sent to kill him and Aristobulus had pity upon them,
and stole them away, by putting bodies that were like theirs in their
places. This man deceived the Jews that were at Crete, and got a great
deal of money of them for traveling in splendor; and thence sailed to
Melos, where he was thought so certainly genuine, that he got a great
deal more money, and prevailed with those that had treated him to sail
along with him to Rome. So he landed at Dicearchia, [Puteoli,] and got
very large presents from the Jews who dwelt there, and was conducted by
his father's friends as if he were a king; nay, the resemblance in
his countenance procured him so much credit, that those who had seen
Alexander, and had known him very well, would take their oaths that he
was the very same person. Accordingly, the whole body of the Jews that
were at Rome ran out in crowds to see him, and an innumerable multitude
there was which stood in the narrow places through which he was carried;
for those of Melos were so far distracted, that they carried him in a
sedan, and maintained a royal attendance for him at their own proper
charges.

2. But Caesar, who knew perfectly well the lineaments of Alexander's
face, because he had been accused by Herod before him, discerned the
fallacy in his countenance, even before he saw the man. However, he
suffered the agreeable fame that went of him to have some weight with
him, and sent Celadus, one who well knew Alexander, and ordered him
to bring the young man to him. But when Caesar saw him, he immediately
discerned a difference in his countenance; and when he had discovered
that his whole body was of a more robust texture, and like that of a
slave, he understood the whole was a contrivance. But the impudence of
what he said greatly provoked him to be angry at him; for when he was
asked about Aristobulus, he said that he was also preserved alive, and
was left on purpose in Cyprus, for fear of treachery, because it would
be harder for plotters to get them both into their power while they were
separate. Then did Caesar take him by himself privately, and said to
him, "I will give thee thy life, if thou wilt discover who it was that
persuaded thee to forge such stories." So he said that he would discover
him, and followed Caesar, and pointed to that Jew who abused the
resemblance of his face to get money; for that he had received more
presents in every city than ever Alexander did when he was alive. Caesar
laughed at the contrivance, and put this spurious Alexander among his
rowers, on account of the strength of his body, but ordered him that
persuaded him to be put to death. But for the people of Melos, they had
been sufficiently punished for their folly, by the expenses they had
been at on his account.

3. And now Archelaus took possession of his ethnarchy, and used not the
Jews only, but the Samaritans also, barbarously; and this out of his
resentment of their old quarrels with him. Whereupon they both of them
sent ambassadors against him to Caesar; and in the ninth year of his
government he was banished to Vienna, a city of Gaul, and his effects
were put into Caesar's treasury. But the report goes, that before he was
sent for by Caesar, he seemed to see nine ears of corn, full and large,
but devoured by oxen. When, therefore, he had sent for the diviners,
and some of the Chaldeans, and inquired of them what they thought it
portended; and when one of them had one interpretation, and another had
another, Simon, one of the sect of Essens, said that he thought the
ears of corn denoted years, and the oxen denoted a mutation of things,
because by their ploughing they made an alteration of the country. That
therefore he should reign as many years as there were ears of corn; and
after he had passed through various alterations of fortune, should
die. Now five days after Archelaus had heard this interpretation he was
called to his trial.

4. I cannot also but think it worthy to be recorded what dream Glaphyra,
the daughter of Archelaus, king of Cappadocia, had, who had at first
been wife to Alexander, who was the brother of Archelaus, concerning
whom we have been discoursing. This Alexander was the son of Herod the
king, by whom he was put to death, as we have already related. This
Glaphyra was married, after his death, to Juba, king of Libya; and,
after his death, was returned home, and lived a widow with her father.
Then it was that Archelaus, the ethnarch, saw her, and fell so deeply
in love with her, that he divorced Mariamne, who was then his wife,
and married her. When, therefore, she was come into Judea, and had been
there for a little while, she thought she saw Alexander stand by her,
and that he said to her; "Thy marriage with the king of Libya might have
been sufficient for thee; but thou wast not contented with him, but art
returned again to my family, to a third husband; and him, thou impudent
woman, hast thou chosen for thine husband, who is my brother. However, I
shall not overlook the injury thou hast offered me; I shall [soon] have
thee again, whether thou wilt or no." Now Glaphyra hardly survived the
narration of this dream of hers two days.






CHAPTER 8.


     Archelaus's Ethnarchy Is Reduced Into A [Roman] Province.
     The Sedition Of Judas Of Galilee. The Three Sects.

1. And now Archelaus's part of Judea was reduced into a province, and
Coponius, one of the equestrian order among the Romans, was sent as a
procurator, having the power of [life and] death put into his hands by
Caesar. Under his administration it was that a certain Galilean, whose
name was Judas, prevailed with his countrymen to revolt, and said they
were cowards if they would endure to pay a tax to the Romans and would
after God submit to mortal men as their lords. This man was a teacher
of a peculiar sect of his own, and was not at all like the rest of those
their leaders.

2. For there are three philosophical sects among the Jews. The followers
of the first of which are the Pharisees; of the second, the Sadducees;
and the third sect, which pretends to a severer discipline, are called
Essens. These last are Jews by birth, and seem to have a greater
affection for one another than the other sects have. These Essens reject
pleasures as an evil, but esteem continence, and the conquest over
our passions, to be virtue. They neglect wedlock, but choose out other
persons children, while they are pliable, and fit for learning, and
esteem them to be of their kindred, and form them according to their own
manners. They do not absolutely deny the fitness of marriage, and the
succession of mankind thereby continued; but they guard against the
lascivious behavior of women, and are persuaded that none of them
preserve their fidelity to one man.

3. These men are despisers of riches, and so very communicative as
raises our admiration. Nor is there any one to be found among them who
hath more than another; for it is a law among them, that those who come
to them must let what they have be common to the whole order,--insomuch
that among them all there is no appearance of poverty, or excess of
riches, but every one's possessions are intermingled with every other's
possessions; and so there is, as it were, one patrimony among all the
brethren. They think that oil is a defilement; and if any one of them be
anointed without his own approbation, it is wiped off his body; for they
think to be sweaty is a good thing, as they do also to be clothed in
white garments. They also have stewards appointed to take care of their
common affairs, who every one of them have no separate business for any,
but what is for the uses of them all.

4. They have no one certain city, but many of them dwell in every city;
and if any of their sect come from other places, what they have lies
open for them, just as if it were their own; and they go in to such as
they never knew before, as if they had been ever so long acquainted with
them. For which reason they carry nothing at all with them when they
travel into remote parts, though still they take their weapons with
them, for fear of thieves. Accordingly, there is, in every city where
they live, one appointed particularly to take care of strangers, and
to provide garments and other necessaries for them. But the habit and
management of their bodies is such as children use who are in fear of
their masters. Nor do they allow of the change of garments or of shoes
till be first torn to pieces, or worn out by time. Nor do they either
buy or sell any thing to one another; but every one of them gives what
he hath to him that wanteth it, and receives from him again in lieu of
it what may be convenient for himself; and although there be no requital
made, they are fully allowed to take what they want of whomsoever they
please.

5. And as for their piety towards God, it is very extraordinary; for
before sun-rising they speak not a word about profane matters, but put
up certain prayers which they have received from their forefathers, as
if they made a supplication for its rising. After this every one of them
are sent away by their curators, to exercise some of those arts wherein
they are skilled, in which they labor with great diligence till the
fifth hour. After which they assemble themselves together again into one
place; and when they have clothed themselves in white veils, they then
bathe their bodies in cold water. And after this purification is over,
they every one meet together in an apartment of their own, into which it
is not permitted to any of another sect to enter; while they go, after
a pure manner, into the dining-room, as into a certain holy temple, and
quietly set themselves down; upon which the baker lays them loaves in
order; the cook also brings a single plate of one sort of food, and sets
it before every one of them; but a priest says grace before meat; and it
is unlawful for any one to taste of the food before grace be said. The
same priest, when he hath dined, says grace again after meat; and when
they begin, and when they end, they praise God, as he that bestows their
food upon them; after which they lay aside their [white] garments, and
betake themselves to their labors again till the evening; then they
return home to supper, after the same manner; and if there be any
strangers there, they sit down with them. Nor is there ever any clamor
or disturbance to pollute their house, but they give every one leave to
speak in their turn; which silence thus kept in their house appears
to foreigners like some tremendous mystery; the cause of which is that
perpetual sobriety they exercise, and the same settled measure of
meat and drink that is allotted them, and that such as is abundantly
sufficient for them.

6. And truly, as for other things, they do nothing but according to the
injunctions of their curators; only these two things are done among them
at everyone's own free-will, which are to assist those that want it,
and to show mercy; for they are permitted of their own accord to afford
succor to such as deserve it, when they stand in need of it, and to
bestow food on those that are in distress; but they cannot give any
thing to their kindred without the curators. They dispense their anger
after a just manner, and restrain their passion. They are eminent for
fidelity, and are the ministers of peace; whatsoever they say also is
firmer than an oath; but swearing is avoided by them, and they esteem it
worse than perjury 4 for they say that he who cannot be believed without
[swearing by] God is already condemned. They also take great pains in
studying the writings of the ancients, and choose out of them what is
most for the advantage of their soul and body; and they inquire after
such roots and medicinal stones as may cure their distempers.

7. But now if any one hath a mind to come over to their sect, he is not
immediately admitted, but he is prescribed the same method of living
which they use for a year, while he continues excluded'; and they give
him also a small hatchet, and the fore-mentioned girdle, and the white
garment. And when he hath given evidence, during that time, that he can
observe their continence, he approaches nearer to their way of living,
and is made a partaker of the waters of purification; yet is he not
even now admitted to live with them; for after this demonstration of his
fortitude, his temper is tried two more years; and if he appear to be
worthy, they then admit him into their society. And before he is allowed
to touch their common food, he is obliged to take tremendous oaths,
that, in the first place, he will exercise piety towards God, and then
that he will observe justice towards men, and that he will do no harm to
any one, either of his own accord, or by the command of others; that he
will always hate the wicked, and be assistant to the righteous; that
he will ever show fidelity to all men, and especially to those
in authority, because no one obtains the government without God's
assistance; and that if he be in authority, he will at no time whatever
abuse his authority, nor endeavor to outshine his subjects either in his
garments, or any other finery; that he will be perpetually a lover of
truth, and propose to himself to reprove those that tell lies; that he
will keep his hands clear from theft, and his soul from unlawful gains;
and that he will neither conceal any thing from those of his own sect,
nor discover any of their doctrines to others, no, not though anyone
should compel him so to do at the hazard of his life. Moreover, he
swears to communicate their doctrines to no one any otherwise than as
he received them himself; that he will abstain from robbery, and will
equally preserve the books belonging to their sect, and the names of the
angels 5 [or messengers]. These are the oaths by which they secure their
proselytes to themselves.

8. But for those that are caught in any heinous sins, they cast them out
of their society; and he who is thus separated from them does often die
after a miserable manner; for as he is bound by the oath he hath taken,
and by the customs he hath been engaged in, he is not at liberty to
partake of that food that he meets with elsewhere, but is forced to eat
grass, and to famish his body with hunger, till he perish; for which
reason they receive many of them again when they are at their last gasp,
out of compassion to them, as thinking the miseries they have endured
till they came to the very brink of death to be a sufficient punishment
for the sins they had been guilty of.

9. But in the judgments they exercise they are most accurate and just,
nor do they pass sentence by the votes of a court that is fewer than
a hundred. And as to what is once determined by that number, it is
unalterable. What they most of all honor, after God himself, is the name
of their legislator [Moses], whom if any one blaspheme he is punished
capitally. They also think it a good thing to obey their elders, and the
major part. Accordingly, if ten of them be sitting together, no one of
them will speak while the other nine are against it. They also avoid
spitting in the midst of them, or on the right side. Moreover, they are
stricter than any other of the Jews in resting from their labors on the
seventh day; for they not only get their food ready the day before, that
they may not be obliged to kindle a fire on that day, but they will not
remove any vessel out of its place, nor go to stool thereon. Nay, on
other days they dig a small pit, a foot deep, with a paddle [which kind
of hatchet is given them when they are first admitted among them]; and
covering themselves round with their garment, that they may not affront
the Divine rays of light, they ease themselves into that pit, after
which they put the earth that was dug out again into the pit; and even
this they do only in the more lonely places, which they choose out for
this purpose; and although this easement of the body be natural, yet
it is a rule with them to wash themselves after it, as if it were a
defilement to them.

10. Now after the time of their preparatory trial is over, they are
parted into four classes; and so far are the juniors inferior to the
seniors, that if the seniors should be touched by the juniors, they must
wash themselves, as if they had intermixed themselves with the company
of a foreigner. They are long-lived also, insomuch that many of them
live above a hundred years, by means of the simplicity of their diet;
nay, as I think, by means of the regular course of life they observe
also. They contemn the miseries of life, and are above pain, by the
generosity of their mind. And as for death, if it will be for their
glory, they esteem it better than living always; and indeed our war with
the Romans gave abundant evidence what great souls they had in their
trials, wherein, although they were tortured and distorted, burnt and
torn to pieces, and went through all kinds of instruments of torment,
that they might be forced either to blaspheme their legislator, or to
eat what was forbidden them, yet could they not be made to do either of
them, no, nor once to flatter their tormentors, or to shed a tear;
but they smiled in their very pains, and laughed those to scorn who
inflicted the torments upon them, and resigned up their souls with great
alacrity, as expecting to receive them again.

11. For their doctrine is this: That bodies are corruptible, and that
the matter they are made of is not permanent; but that the souls are
immortal, and continue for ever; and that they come out of the most
subtile air, and are united to their bodies as to prisons, into which
they are drawn by a certain natural enticement; but that when they are
set free from the bonds of the flesh, they then, as released from a long
bondage, rejoice and mount upward. And this is like the opinions of the
Greeks, that good souls have their habitations beyond the ocean, in a
region that is neither oppressed with storms of rain or snow, or with
intense heat, but that this place is such as is refreshed by the gentle
breathing of a west wind, that is perpetually blowing from the ocean;
while they allot to bad souls a dark and tempestuous den, full of
never-ceasing punishments. And indeed the Greeks seem to me to have
followed the same notion, when they allot the islands of the blessed to
their brave men, whom they call heroes and demi-gods; and to the souls
of the wicked, the region of the ungodly, in Hades, where their fables
relate that certain persons, such as Sisyphus, and Tantalus, and Ixion,
and Tityus, are punished; which is built on this first supposition,
that souls are immortal; and thence are those exhortations to virtue and
dehortations from wickedness collected; whereby good men are bettered
in the conduct of their life by the hope they have of reward after their
death; and whereby the vehement inclinations of bad men to vice are
restrained, by the fear and expectation they are in, that although
they should lie concealed in this life, they should suffer immortal
punishment after their death. These are the Divine doctrines of the
Essens 6 about the soul, which lay an unavoidable bait for such as have
once had a taste of their philosophy.

12. There are also those among them who undertake to foretell things
to come, 7 by reading the holy books, and using several sorts of
purifications, and being perpetually conversant in the discourses of the
prophets; and it is but seldom that they miss in their predictions.

13. Moreover, there is another order of Essens, 8 who agree with the
rest as to their way of living, and customs, and laws, but differ from
them in the point of marriage, as thinking that by not marrying they
cut off the principal part of human life, which is the prospect of
succession; nay, rather, that if all men should be of the same opinion,
the whole race of mankind would fail. However, they try their spouses
for three years; and if they find that they have their natural
purgations thrice, as trials that they are likely to be fruitful, they
then actually marry them. But they do not use to accompany with their
wives when they are with child, as a demonstration that they do not many
out of regard to pleasure, but for the sake of posterity. Now the women
go into the baths with some of their garments on, as the men do with
somewhat girded about them. And these are the customs of this order of
Essens.

14. But then as to the two other orders at first mentioned, the
Pharisees are those who are esteemed most skillful in the exact
explication of their laws, and introduce the first sect. These ascribe
all to fate [or providence], and to God, and yet allow, that to act what
is right, or the contrary, is principally in the power of men, although
fate does co-operate in every action. They say that all souls are
incorruptible, but that the souls of good men only are removed into
other bodies,--but that the souls of bad men are subject to eternal
punishment. But the Sadducees are those that compose the second order,
and take away fate entirely, and suppose that God is not concerned in
our doing or not doing what is evil; and they say, that to act what is
good, or what is evil, is at men's own choice, and that the one or the
other belongs so to every one, that they may act as they please. They
also take away the belief of the immortal duration of the soul, and the
punishments and rewards in Hades. Moreover, the Pharisees are friendly
to one another, and are for the exercise of concord, and regard for the
public; but the behavior of the Sadducees one towards another is in some
degree wild, and their conversation with those that are of their own
party is as barbarous as if they were strangers to them. And this is
what I had to say concerning the philosophic sects among the Jews.






CHAPTER 9.


     The Death Of Salome. The Cities Which Herod And Philip
     Built. Pilate Occasions Disturbances. Tiberius Puts Agrippa
     Into Bonds But Caius Frees Him From Them, And Makes Him
     King. Herod Antipas Is Banished.

1. And now as the ethnarchy of Archelaus was fallen into a Roman
province, the other sons of Herod, Philip, and that Herod who was called
Antipas, each of them took upon them the administration of their own
tetrarchies; for when Salome died, she bequeathed to Julia, the wife of
Augustus, both her toparchy, and Jamriga, as also her plantation of palm
trees that were in Phasaelis. But when the Roman empire was translated
to Tiberius, the son of Julia, upon the death of Augustus, who had
reigned fifty-seven years, six months, and two days, both Herod and
Philip continued in their tetrarchies; and the latter of them built the
city Cesarea, at the fountains of Jordan, and in the region of Paneas;
as also the city Julias, in the lower Gaulonitis. Herod also built the
city Tiberius in Galilee, and in Perea [beyond Jordan] another that was
also called Julias.

2. Now Pilate, who was sent as procurator into Judea by Tiberius, sent
by night those images of Caesar that are called ensigns into Jerusalem.
This excited a very great tumult among the Jews when it was day;
for those that were near them were astonished at the sight of them, as
indications that their laws were trodden under foot; for those laws do
not permit any sort of image to be brought into the city. Nay, besides
the indignation which the citizens had themselves at this procedure,
a vast number of people came running out of the country. These came
zealously to Pilate to Cesarea, and besought him to carry those ensigns
out of Jerusalem, and to preserve them their ancient laws inviolable;
but upon Pilate's denial of their request, they fell 9 down prostrate
upon the ground, and continued immovable in that posture for five days
and as many nights.

3. On the next day Pilate sat upon his tribunal, in the open
market-place, and called to him the multitude, as desirous to give them
an answer; and then gave a signal to the soldiers, that they should all
by agreement at once encompass the Jews with their weapons; so the band
of soldiers stood round about the Jews in three ranks. The Jews were
under the utmost consternation at that unexpected sight. Pilate also
said to them that they should be cut in pieces, unless they would admit
of Caesar's images, and gave intimation to the soldiers to draw their
naked swords. Hereupon the Jews, as it were at one signal, fell down in
vast numbers together, and exposed their necks bare, and cried out
that they were sooner ready to be slain, than that their law should be
transgressed. Hereupon Pilate was greatly surprised at their prodigious
superstition, and gave order that the ensigns should be presently
carried out of Jerusalem.

4. After this he raised another disturbance, by expending that sacred
treasure which is called Corban 10 upon aqueducts, whereby he brought
water from the distance of four hundred furlongs. At this the multitude
had indignation; and when Pilate was come to Jerusalem, they came
about his tribunal, and made a clamor at it. Now when he was apprized
aforehand of this disturbance, he mixed his own soldiers in their armor
with the multitude, and ordered them to conceal themselves under the
habits of private men, and not indeed to use their swords, but with
their staves to beat those that made the clamor. He then gave the signal
from his tribunal [to do as he had bidden them]. Now the Jews were so
sadly beaten, that many of them perished by the stripes they received,
and many of them perished as trodden to death by themselves; by which
means the multitude was astonished at the calamity of those that were
slain, and held their peace.

5. In the mean time Agrippa, the son of that Aristobulus who had
been slain by his father Herod, came to Tiberius, to accuse Herod the
tetrarch; who not admitting of his accusation, he staid at Rome, and
cultivated a friendship with others of the men of note, but principally
with Caius the son of Germanicus, who was then but a private person.
Now this Agrippa, at a certain time, feasted Caius; and as he was very
complaisant to him on several other accounts, he at length stretched out
his hands, and openly wished that Tiberius might die, and that he might
quickly see him emperor of the world. This was told to Tiberius by
one of Agrippa's domestics, who thereupon was very angry, and ordered
Agrippa to be bound, and had him very ill-treated in the prison for six
months, until Tiberius died, after he had reigned twenty-two years, six
months, and three days.

6. But when Caius was made Caesar, he released Agrippa from his bonds,
and made him king of Philip's tetrarchy, who was now dead; but when
Agrippa had arrived at that degree of dignity, he inflamed the ambitious
desires of Herod the tetrarch, who was chiefly induced to hope for the
royal authority by his wife Herodias, who reproached him for his sloth,
and told him that it was only because he would not sail to Caesar
that he was destitute of that great dignity; for since Caesar had made
Agrippa a king, from a private person, much mole would he advance him
from a tetrarch to that dignity. These arguments prevailed with Herod,
so that he came to Caius, by whom he was punished for his ambition, by
being banished into Spain; for Agrippa followed him, in order to accuse
him; to whom also Caius gave his tetrarchy, by way of addition. So Herod
died in Spain, whither his wife had followed him.






CHAPTER 10.


     Caius Commands That His Statue Should Be Set Up In The
     Temple Itself; And What Petronius Did Thereupon.

1. Now Caius Caesar did so grossly abuse the fortune he had arrived at,
as to take himself to be a god, and to desire to be so called also, and
to cut off those of the greatest nobility out of his country. He also
extended his impiety as far as the Jews. Accordingly, he sent Petronius
with an army to Jerusalem, to place his statues in the temple, 11 and
commanded him that, in case the Jews would not admit of them, he should
slay those that opposed it, and carry all the rest of the nation into
captivity: but God concerned himself with these his commands. However,
Petronius marched out of Antioch into Judea, with three legions, and
many Syrian auxiliaries. Now as to the Jews, some of them could not
believe the stories that spake of a war; but those that did believe them
were in the utmost distress how to defend themselves, and the terror
diffused itself presently through them all; for the army was already
come to Ptolemais.

2. This Ptolemais is a maritime city of Galilee, built in the great
plain. It is encompassed with mountains: that on the east side, sixty
furlongs off, belongs to Galilee; but that on the south belongs to
Carmel, which is distant from it a hundred and twenty furlongs; and that
on the north is the highest of them all, and is called by the people of
the country, The Ladder of the Tyrians, which is at the distance of
a hundred furlongs. The very small river Belus 12 runs by it, at the
distance of two furlongs; near which there is Menmon's monument, 13 and
hath near it a place no larger than a hundred cubits, which deserves
admiration; for the place is round and hollow, and affords such sand
as glass is made of; which place, when it hath been emptied by the many
ships there loaded, it is filled again by the winds, which bring into
it, as it were on purpose, that sand which lay remote, and was no more
than bare common sand, while this mine presently turns it into glassy
sand. And what is to me still more wonderful, that glassy sand which is
superfluous, and is once removed out of the place, becomes bare common
sand again. And this is the nature of the place we are speaking of.

3. But now the Jews got together in great numbers with their wives and
children into that plain that was by Ptolemais, and made supplication to
Petronius, first for their laws, and, in the next place, for themselves.
So he was prevailed upon by the multitude of the supplicants, and by
their supplications, and left his army and the statues at Ptolemais, and
then went forward into Galilee, and called together the multitude
and all the men of note to Tiberias, and showed them the power of the
Romans, and the threatenings of Caesar; and, besides this, proved
that their petition was unreasonable, because while all the nations
in subjection to them had placed the images of Caesar in their several
cities, among the rest of their gods, for them alone to oppose it, was
almost like the behavior of revolters, and was injurious to Caesar.

4. And when they insisted on their law, and the custom of their country,
and how it was not only not permitted them to make either an image of
God, or indeed of a man, and to put it in any despicable part of their
country, much less in the temple itself, Petronius replied, "And am
not I also," said he, "bound to keep the law of my own lord? For if I
transgress it, and spare you, it is but just that I perish; while he
that sent me, and not I, will commence a war against you; for I am under
command as well as you." Hereupon the whole multitude cried out that
they were ready to suffer for their law. Petronius then quieted them,
and said to them, "Will you then make war against Caesar?" The Jews
said, "We offer sacrifices twice every day for Caesar, and for the Roman
people;" but that if he would place the images among them, he must first
sacrifice the whole Jewish nation; and that they were ready to expose
themselves, together with their children and wives, to be slain. At
this Petronius was astonished, and pitied them, on account of the
inexpressible sense of religion the men were under, and that courage
of theirs which made them ready to die for it; so they were dismissed
without success.

5. But on the following days he got together the men of power privately,
and the multitude publicly, and sometimes he used persuasions to them,
and sometimes he gave them his advice; but he chiefly made use of
threatenings to them, and insisted upon the power of the Romans, and the
anger of Caius; and besides, upon the necessity he was himself under [to
do as he was enjoined]. But as they could be no way prevailed upon, and
he saw that the country was in danger of lying without tillage; [for it
was about seed time that the multitude continued for fifty days together
idle;] so he at last got them together, and told them that it was
best for him to run some hazard himself; "for either, by the Divine
assistance, I shall prevail with Caesar, and shall myself escape the
danger as well as you, which will be matter of joy to us both; or, in
case Caesar continue in his rage, I will be ready to expose my own
life for such a great number as you are." Whereupon he dismissed the
multitude, who prayed greatly for his prosperity; and he took the army
out of Ptolemais, and returned to Antioch; from whence he presently sent
an epistle to Caesar, and informed him of the irruption he had made into
Judea, and of the supplications of the nation; and that unless he had a
mind to lose both the country and the men in it, he must permit them
to keep their law, and must countermand his former injunction. Caius
answered that epistle in a violent-way, and threatened to have Petronius
put to death for his being so tardy in the execution of what he had
commanded. But it happened that those who brought Caius's epistle were
tossed by a storm, and were detained on the sea for three months,
while others that brought the news of Caius's death had a good voyage.
Accordingly, Petronins received the epistle concerning Caius seven and
twenty days before he received that which was against himself.






CHAPTER 11.


     Concerning The Government Of Claudius, And The Reign Of
     Agrippa. Concerning The Deaths Of Agrippa And Of Herod And
     What Children They Both Left Behind Them.

1. Now when Caius had reigned three years and eight months, and had been
slain by treachery, Claudius was hurried away by the armies that were at
Rome to take the government upon him; but the senate, upon the reference
of the consuls, Sentis Saturninus, and Pomponius Secundus, gave orders
to the three regiments of soldiers that staid with them to keep the city
quiet, and went up into the capitol in great numbers, and resolved to
oppose Claudius by force, on account of the barbarous treatment they
had met with from Caius; and they determined either to settle the nation
under an aristocracy, as they had of old been governed, or at least to
choose by vote such a one for emperor as might be worthy of it.

2. Now it happened that at this time Agrippa sojourned at Rome, and that
both the senate called him to consult with them, and at the same time
Claudius sent for him out of the camp, that he might be serviceable to
him, as he should have occasion for his service. So he, perceiving that
Claudius was in effect made Caesar already, went to him, who sent him as
an ambassador to the senate, to let them know what his intentions were:
that, in the first place, it was without his seeking that he was hurried
away by the soldiers; moreover, that he thought it was not just to
desert those soldiers in such their zeal for him, and that if he should
do so, his own fortune would be in uncertainty; for that it was a
dangerous case to have been once called to the empire. He added further,
that he would administer the government as a good prince, and not like
a tyrant; for that he would be satisfied with the honor of being called
emperor, but would, in every one of his actions, permit them all to
give him their advice; for that although he had not been by nature
for moderation, yet would the death of Caius afford him a sufficient
demonstration how soberly he ought to act in that station.

3. This message was delivered by Agrippa; to which the senate replied,
that since they had an army, and the wisest counsels on their side,
they would not endure a voluntary slavery. And when Claudius heard what
answer the senate had made, he sent Agrippa to them again, with the
following message: That he could not bear the thoughts of betraying them
that had given their oaths to be true to him; and that he saw he must
fight, though unwillingly, against such as he had no mind to fight;
that, however, [if it must come to that,] it was proper to choose a
place without the city for the war, because it was not agreeable to
piety to pollute the temples of their own city with the blood of their
own countrymen, and this only on occasion of their imprudent conduct.
And when Agrippa had heard this message, he delivered it to the
senators.

4. In the mean time, one of the soldiers belonging to the senate drew
his sword, and cried out, "O my fellow soldiers, what is the meaning of
this choice of ours, to kill our brethren, and to use violence to our
kindred that are with Claudius? while we may have him for our emperor
whom no one can blame, and who hath so many just reasons [to lay claim
to the government]; and this with regard to those against whom we are
going to fight." When he had said this, he marched through the whole
senate, and carried all the soldiers along with him. Upon which all
the patricians were immediately in a great fright at their being thus
deserted. But still, because there appeared no other way whither they
could turn themselves for deliverance, they made haste the same way with
the soldiers, and went to Claudius. But those that had the greatest luck
in flattering the good fortune of Claudius betimes met them before the
walls with their naked swords, and there was reason to fear that those
that came first might have been in danger, before Claudius could know
what violence the soldiers were going to offer them, had not Agrippa ran
before, and told him what a dangerous thing they were going about, and
that unless he restrained the violence of these men, who were in a fit
of madness against the patricians, he would lose those on whose account
it was most desirable to rule, and would be emperor over a desert.

5. When Claudius heard this, he restrained the violence of the soldiery,
and received the senate into the camp, and treated them after an
obliging manner, and went out with them presently to offer their
thank-offerings to God, which were proper upon, his first coming to
the empire. Moreover, he bestowed on Agrippa his whole paternal kingdom
immediately, and added to it, besides those countries that had been
given by Augustus to Herod, Trachonitis and Auranitis, and still besides
these, that kingdom which was called the kingdom of Lysanius. This gift
he declared to the people by a decree, but ordered the magistrates to
have the donation engraved on tables of brass, and to be set up in the
capitol. He bestowed on his brother Herod, who was also his son-in-law,
by marrying [his daughter] Bernice, the kingdom of Chalcis.

6. So now riches flowed in to Agrippa by his enjoyment of so large a
dominion; nor did he abuse the money he had on small matters, but
he began to encompass Jerusalem with such a wall, which, had it been
brought to perfection, had made it impracticable for the Romans to take
it by siege; but his death, which happened at Cesarea, before he had
raised the walls to their due height, prevented him. He had then reigned
three years, as he had governed his tetrarchies three other years.
He left behind him three daughters, born to him by Cypros, Bernice,
Mariamne, and Drusilla, and a son born of the same mother, whose name
was Agrippa: he was left a very young child, so that Claudius made the
country a Roman province, and sent Cuspius Fadus to be its procurator,
and after him Tiberius Alexander, who, making no alterations of the
ancient laws, kept the nation in tranquillity. Now after this, Herod the
king of Chalcis died, and left behind him two sons, born to him of his
brother's daughter Bernice; their names were Bernie Janus and Hyrcanus.
[He also left behind him] Aristobulus, whom he had by his former wife
Mariamne. There was besides another brother of his that died a private
person, his name was also Aristobulus, who left behind him a daughter,
whose name was Jotape: and these, as I have formerly said, were
the children of Aristobulus the son of Herod, which Aristobulus and
Alexander were born to Herod by Mariamne, and were slain by him. But as
for Alexander's posterity, they reigned in Armenia.






CHAPTER 12.


     Many Tumults Under Cumanus, Which Were Composed By
     Quadratus. Felix Is Procurator Of Judea. Agrippa Is Advanced
     From Chalcis To A Greater Kingdom.

1 Now after the death of Herod, king of Chalcis, Claudius set Agrippa,
the son of Agrippa, over his uncle's kingdom, while Cumanus took upon
him the office of procurator of the rest, which was a Roman province,
and therein he succeeded Alexander; under which Cumanus began the
troubles, and the Jews' ruin came on; for when the multitude were come
together to Jerusalem, to the feast of unleavened bread, and a Roman
cohort stood over the cloisters of the temple, [for they always were
armed, and kept guard at the festivals, to prevent any innovation which
the multitude thus gathered together might make,] one of the soldiers
pulled back his garment, and cowering down after an indecent manner,
turned his breech to the Jews, and spake such words as you might expect
upon such a posture. At this the whole multitude had indignation, and
made a clamor to Cumanus, that he would punish the soldier; while
the rasher part of the youth, and such as were naturally the most
tumultuous, fell to fighting, and caught up stones, and threw them at
the soldiers. Upon which Cumanus was afraid lest all the people should
make an assault upon him, and sent to call for more armed men, who, when
they came in great numbers into the cloisters, the Jews were in a very
great consternation; and being beaten out of the temple, they ran into
the city; and the violence with which they crowded to get out was so
great, that they trod upon each other, and squeezed one another, till
ten thousand of them were killed, insomuch that this feast became the
cause of mourning to the whole nation, and every family lamented their
own relations.

2. Now there followed after this another calamity, which arose from
a tumult made by robbers; for at the public road at Beth-boron, one
Stephen, a servant of Caesar, carried some furniture, which the robbers
fell upon and seized. Upon this Cumanus sent men to go round about to
the neighboring villages, and to bring their inhabitants to him bound,
as laying it to their charge that they had not pursued after the
thieves, and caught them. Now here it was that a certain soldier,
finding the sacred book of the law, tore it to pieces, and threw it into
the fire. 14 Hereupon the Jews were in great disorder, as if their whole
country were in a flame, and assembled themselves so many of them by
their zeal for their religion, as by an engine, and ran together with
united clamor to Cesarea, to Cumanus, and made supplication to him that
he would not overlook this man, who had offered such an affront to God,
and to his law; but punish him for what he had done. Accordingly, he,
perceiving that the multitude would not be quiet unless they had a
comfortable answer from him, gave order that the soldier should be
brought, and drawn through those that required to have him punished, to
execution, which being done, the Jews went their ways.

3. After this there happened a fight between the Galileans and the
Samaritans; it happened at a village called Geman, which is situate in
the great plain of Samaria; where, as a great number of Jews were going
up to Jerusalem to the feast [of tabernacles,] a certain Galilean was
slain; and besides, a vast number of people ran together out of Galilee,
in order to fight with the Samaritans. But the principal men among
them came to Cumanus, and besought him that, before the evil became
incurable, he would come into Galilee, and bring the authors of this
murder to punishment; for that there was no other way to make the
multitude separate without coming to blows. However, Cumanus postponed
their supplications to the other affairs he was then about, and sent the
petitioners away without success.

4. But when the affair of this murder came to be told at Jerusalem, it
put the multitude into disorder, and they left the feast; and without
any generals to conduct them, they marched with great violence to
Samaria; nor would they be ruled by any of the magistrates that were set
over them, but they were managed by one Eleazar, the son of Dineus, and
by Alexander, in these their thievish and seditious attempts. These
men fell upon those that were in the neighborhood of the Acrabatene
toparchy, and slew them, without sparing any age, and set the villages
on fire.

5. But Cumanus took one troop of horsemen, called the troop of Sebaste,
out of Cesarea, and came to the assistance of those that were spoiled;
he also seized upon a great number of those that followed Eleazar, and
slew more of them. And as for the rest of the multitude of those that
went so zealously to fight with the Samaritans, the rulers of Jerusalem
ran out clothed with sackcloth, and having ashes on their head, and
begged of them to go their ways, lest by their attempt to revenge
themselves upon the Samaritans they should provoke the Romans to come
against Jerusalem; to have compassion upon their country and temple,
their children and their wives, and not bring the utmost dangers of
destruction upon them, in order to avenge themselves upon one Galilean
only. The Jews complied with these persuasions of theirs, and dispersed
themselves; but still there were a great number who betook themselves
to robbing, in hopes of impunity; and rapines and insurrections of the
bolder sort happened over the whole country. And the men of power among
the Samaritans came to Tyre, to Ummidius Quadratus, 15 the president of
Syria, and desired that they that had laid waste the country might be
punished: the great men also of the Jews, and Jonathan the son of Ananus
the high priest, came thither, and said that the Samaritans were
the beginners of the disturbance, on account of that murder they had
committed; and that Cumanus had given occasion to what had happened, by
his unwillingness to punish the original authors of that murder.

6. But Quadratus put both parties off for that time, and told them, that
when he should come to those places, he would make a diligent inquiry
after every circumstance. After which he went to Cesarea, and crucified
all those whom Cumanus had taken alive; and when from thence he was come
to the city Lydda, he heard the affair of the Samaritans, and sent for
eighteen of the Jews, whom he had learned to have been concerned in that
fight, and beheaded them; but he sent two others of those that were of
the greatest power among them, and both Jonathan and Ananias, the high
priests, as also Artanus the son of this Ananias, and certain others
that were eminent among the Jews, to Caesar; as he did in like manner
by the most illustrious of the Samaritans. He also ordered that Cumanus
[the procurator] and Celer the tribune should sail to Rome, in order to
give an account of what had been done to Caesar. When he had finished
these matters, he went up from Lydda to Jerusalem, and finding the
multitude celebrating their feast of unleavened bread without any
tumult, he returned to Antioch.

7. Now when Caesar at Rome had heard what Cumanus and the Samaritans
had to say, [where it was done in the hearing of Agrippa, who zealously
espoused the cause of the Jews, as in like manner many of the great men
stood by Cumanus,] he condemned the Samaritans, and commanded that three
of the most powerful men among them should be put to death; he banished
Cumanus, and sent Celer bound to Jerusalem, to be delivered over to the
Jews to be tormented; that he should be drawn round the city, and then
beheaded.

8. After this Caesar sent Felix, 16 the brother of Pallas, to be
procurator of Galilee, and Samaria, and Perea, and removed Agrippa from
Chalcis unto a greater kingdom; for he gave him the tetrarchy which
had belonged to Philip, which contained Batanae, Trachonitis, and
Gaulonitis: he added to it the kingdom of Lysanias, and that province
[Abilene] which Varus had governed. But Claudius himself, when he had
administered the government thirteen years, eight months, and twenty
days, died, and left Nero to be his successor in the empire, whom he had
adopted by his Wife Agrippina's delusions, in order to be his successor,
although he had a son of his own, whose name was Britannicus, by
Messalina his former wife, and a daughter whose name was Octavia, whom
he had married to Nero; he had also another daughter by Petina, whose
name was Antonia.






CHAPTER 13.


     Nero Adds Four Cities To Agrippas Kingdom; But The Other
     Parts Of Judea Were Under Felix. The Disturbances Which Were
     Raised By The Sicarii The Magicians And An Egyptian False
     Prophet. The Jews And Syrians Have A Contest At Cesarea.

1. Now as to the many things in which Nero acted like a madman, out of
the extravagant degree of the felicity and riches which he enjoyed, and
by that means used his good fortune to the injury of others; and after
what manner he slew his brother, and wife, and mother, from whom his
barbarity spread itself to others that were most nearly related to him;
and how, at last, he was so distracted that he became an actor in
the scenes, and upon the theater,--I omit to say any more about them,
because there are writers enough upon those subjects every where; but
I shall turn myself to those actions of his time in which the Jews were
concerned.

2. Nero therefore bestowed the kingdom of the Lesser Armenia upon
Aristobulus, Herod's son, 17 and he added to Agrippa's kingdom four
cities, with the toparchies to them belonging; I mean Abila, and that
Julias which is in Perea, Tarichea also, and Tiberias of Galilee; but
over the rest of Judea he made Felix procurator. This Felix took Eleazar
the arch-robber, and many that were with him, alive, when they had
ravaged the country for twenty years together, and sent them to Rome;
but as to the number of the robbers whom he caused to be crucified, and
of those who were caught among them, and whom he brought to punishment,
they were a multitude not to be enumerated.

3. When the country was purged of these, there sprang up another sort of
robbers in Jerusalem, which were called Sicarii, who slew men in the
day time, and in the midst of the city; this they did chiefly at
the festivals, when they mingled themselves among the multitude, and
concealed daggers under their garments, with which they stabbed those
that were their enemies; and when any fell down dead, the murderers
became a part of those that had indignation against them; by which means
they appeared persons of such reputation, that they could by no means
be discovered. The first man who was slain by them was Jonathan the high
priest, after whose death many were slain every day, while the fear men
were in of being so served was more afflicting than the calamity itself;
and while every body expected death every hour, as men do in war, so men
were obliged to look before them, and to take notice of their enemies at
a great distance; nor, if their friends were coming to them, durst
they trust them any longer; but, in the midst of their suspicions and
guarding of themselves, they were slain. Such was the celerity of the
plotters against them, and so cunning was their contrivance.

4. There was also another body of wicked men gotten together, not so
impure in their actions, but more wicked in their intentions, which
laid waste the happy state of the city no less than did these murderers.
These were such men as deceived and deluded the people under pretense
of Divine inspiration, but were for procuring innovations and changes
of the government; and these prevailed with the multitude to act like
madmen, and went before them into the wilderness, as pretending that
God would there show them the signals of liberty. But Felix thought this
procedure was to be the beginning of a revolt; so he sent some horsemen
and footmen both armed, who destroyed a great number of them.

5. But there was an Egyptian false prophet that did the Jews more
mischief than the former; for he was a cheat, and pretended to be a
prophet also, and got together thirty thousand men that were deluded by
him; these he led round about from the wilderness to the mount which
was called the Mount of Olives, and was ready to break into Jerusalem
by force from that place; and if he could but once conquer the Roman
garrison and the people, he intended to domineer over them by the
assistance of those guards of his that were to break into the city
with him. But Felix prevented his attempt, and met him with his Roman
soldiers, while all the people assisted him in his attack upon them,
insomuch that when it came to a battle, the Egyptian ran away, with a
few others, while the greatest part of those that were with him were
either destroyed or taken alive; but the rest of the multitude were
dispersed every one to their own homes, and there concealed themselves.

6. Now when these were quieted, it happened, as it does in a diseased
body, that another part was subject to an inflammation; for a company
of deceivers and robbers got together, and persuaded the Jews to revolt,
and exhorted them to assert their liberty, inflicting death on those
that continued in obedience to the Roman government, and saying, that
such as willingly chose slavery ought to be forced from such their
desired inclinations; for they parted themselves into different bodies,
and lay in wait up and down the country, and plundered the houses of the
great men, and slew the men themselves, and set the villages on fire;
and this till all Judea was filled with the effects of their madness.
And thus the flame was every day more and more blown up, till it came to
a direct war.

7. There was also another disturbance at Cesarea,--those Jews who were
mixed with the Syrians that lived there rising a tumult against them.
The Jews pretended that the city was theirs, and said that he who built
it was a Jew, meaning king Herod. The Syrians confessed also that its
builder was a Jew; but they still said, however, that the city was a
Grecian city; for that he who set up statues and temples in it could not
design it for Jews. On which account both parties had a contest with
one another; and this contest increased so much, that it came at last to
arms, and the bolder sort of them marched out to fight; for the elders
of the Jews were not able to put a stop to their own people that were
disposed to be tumultuous, and the Greeks thought it a shame for them
to be overcome by the Jews. Now these Jews exceeded the others in
riches and strength of body; but the Grecian part had the advantage
of assistance from the soldiery; for the greatest part of the Roman
garrison was raised out of Syria; and being thus related to the Syrian
part, they were ready to assist it. However, the governors of the city
were concerned to keep all quiet, and whenever they caught those that
were most for fighting on either side, they punished them with stripes
and bands. Yet did not the sufferings of those that were caught affright
the remainder, or make them desist; but they were still more and more
exasperated, and deeper engaged in the sedition. And as Felix came once
into the market-place, and commanded the Jews, when they had beaten the
Syrians, to go their ways, and threatened them if they would not, and
they would not obey him, he sent his soldiers out upon them, and slew
a great many of them, upon which it fell out that what they had was
plundered. And as the sedition still continued, he chose out the most
eminent men on both sides as ambassadors to Nero, to argue about their
several privileges.






CHAPTER 14.


     Festus Succeeds Felix Who Is Succeeded By Albinus As He Is
     By Florus; Who By The Barbarity Of His Government Forces The
     Jews Into The War.

1. Now it was that Festus succeeded Felix as procurator, and made it his
business to correct those that made disturbances in the country. So he
caught the greatest part of the robbers, and destroyed a great many of
them. But then Albinus, who succeeded Festus, did not execute his office
as the other had done; nor was there any sort of wickedness that could
be named but he had a hand in it. Accordingly, he did not only, in his
political capacity, steal and plunder every one's substance, nor did he
only burden the whole nation with taxes, but he permitted the relations
of such as were in prison for robbery, and had been laid there, either
by the senate of every city, or by the former procurators, to redeem
them for money; and no body remained in the prisons as a malefactor but
he who gave him nothing. At this time it was that the enterprises of
the seditious at Jerusalem were very formidable; the principal men
among them purchasing leave of Albinus to go on with their seditious
practices; while that part of the people who delighted in disturbances
joined themselves to such as had fellowship with Albinus; and every one
of these wicked wretches were encompassed with his own band of robbers,
while he himself, like an arch-robber, or a tyrant, made a figure among
his company, and abused his authority over those about him, in order
to plunder those that lived quietly. The effect of which was this, that
those who lost their goods were forced to hold their peace, when they
had reason to show great indignation at what they had suffered; but
those who had escaped were forced to flatter him that deserved to be
punished, out of the fear they were in of suffering equally with the
others. Upon the Whole, nobody durst speak their minds, but tyranny
was generally tolerated; and at this time were those seeds sown which
brought the city to destruction.

2. And although such was the character of Albinus, yet did Gessius
Florus 18 who succeeded him, demonstrate him to have been a most
excellent person, upon the comparison; for the former did the greatest
part of his rogueries in private, and with a sort of dissimulation; but
Gessius did his unjust actions to the harm of the nation after a pompous
manner; and as though he had been sent as an executioner to punish
condemned malefactors, he omitted no sort of rapine, or of vexation;
where the case was really pitiable, he was most barbarous, and in things
of the greatest turpitude he was most impudent. Nor could any one outdo
him in disguising the truth; nor could any one contrive more subtle ways
of deceit than he did. He indeed thought it but a petty offense to get
money out of single persons; so he spoiled whole cities, and ruined
entire bodies of men at once, and did almost publicly proclaim it all
the country over, that they had liberty given them to turn robbers, upon
this condition, that he might go shares with them in the spoils they
got. Accordingly, this his greediness of gain was the occasion that
entire toparchies were brought to desolation, and a great many of the
people left their own country, and fled into foreign provinces.

3. And truly, while Cestius Gallus was president of the province of
Syria, nobody durst do so much as send an embassage to him against
Florus; but when he was come to Jerusalem, upon the approach of the
feast of unleavened bread, the people came about him not fewer in number
than three millions 19 these besought him to commiserate the calamities
of their nation, and cried out upon Florus as the bane of their country.
But as he was present, and stood by Cestius, he laughed at their words.
However, Cestius, when he had quieted the multitude, and had assured
them that he would take care that Florus should hereafter treat them in
a more gentle manner, returned to Antioch. Florus also conducted him
as far as Cesarea, and deluded him, though he had at that very time the
purpose of showing his anger at the nation, and procuring a war upon
them, by which means alone it was that he supposed he might conceal his
enormities; for he expected that if the peace continued, he should have
the Jews for his accusers before Caesar; but that if he could procure
them to make a revolt, he should divert their laying lesser crimes to
his charge, by a misery that was so much greater; he therefore did every
day augment their calamities, in order to induce them to a rebellion.

4. Now at this time it happened that the Grecians at Cesarea had been
too hard for the Jews, and had obtained of Nero the government of the
city, and had brought the judicial determination: at the same time began
the war, in the twelfth year of the reign of Nero, and the seventeenth
of the reign of Agrippa, in the month of Artemisius [Jyar.] Now the
occasion of this war was by no means proportionable to those heavy
calamities which it brought upon us. For the Jews that dwelt at Cesarea
had a synagogue near the place, whose owner was a certain Cesarean
Greek: the Jews had endeavored frequently to have purchased the
possession of the place, and had offered many times its value for its
price; but as the owner overlooked their offers, so did he raise
other buildings upon the place, in way of affront to them, and made
working-shops of them, and left them but a narrow passage, and such as
was very troublesome for them to go along to their synagogue. Whereupon
the warmer part of the Jewish youth went hastily to the workmen, and
forbade them to build there; but as Florus would not permit them to use
force, the great men of the Jews, with John the publican, being in the
utmost distress what to do, persuaded Florus, with the offer of eight
talents, to hinder the work. He then, being intent upon nothing but
getting money, promised he would do for them all they desired of him,
and then went away from Cesarea to Sebaste, and left the sedition to
take its full course, as if he had sold a license to the Jews to fight
it out.

5. Now on the next day, which was the seventh day of the week, when the
Jews were crowding apace to their synagogue, a certain man of Cesarea,
of a seditious temper, got an earthen vessel, and set it with the bottom
upward, at the entrance of that synagogue, and sacrificed birds. This
thing provoked the Jews to an incurable degree, because their laws were
affronted, and the place was polluted. Whereupon the sober and moderate
part of the Jews thought it proper to have recourse to their governors
again, while the seditious part, and such as were in the fervor of their
youth, were vehemently inflamed to fight. The seditions also among the
Gentiles of Cesarea stood ready for the same purpose; for they had, by
agreement, sent the man to sacrifice beforehand [as ready to support
him;] so that it soon came to blows. Hereupon Jucundus, the master of
the horse, who was ordered to prevent the fight, came thither, and took
away the earthen vessel, and endeavored to put a stop to the sedition;
but when 20 he was overcome by the violence of the people of Cesarea,
the Jews caught up their books of the law, and retired to Narbata, which
was a place to them belonging, distant from Cesarea sixty furlongs.
But John, and twelve of the principal men with him, went to Florus, to
Sebaste, and made a lamentable complaint of their case, and besought
him to help them; and with all possible decency, put him in mind of the
eight talents they had given him; but he had the men seized upon, and
put in prison, and accused them for carrying the books of the law out of
Cesarea.

6. Moreover, as to the citizens of Jerusalem, although they took this
matter very ill, yet did they restrain their passion; but Florus acted
herein as if he had been hired, and blew up the war into a flame, and
sent some to take seventeen talents out of the sacred treasure, and
pretended that Caesar wanted them. At this the people were in confusion
immediately, and ran together to the temple, with prodigious clamors,
and called upon Caesar by name, and besought him to free them from the
tyranny of Florus. Some also of the seditious cried out upon Florus, and
cast the greatest reproaches upon him, and carried a basket about, and
begged some spills of money for him, as for one that was destitute of
possessions, and in a miserable condition. Yet was not he made ashamed
hereby of his love of money, but was more enraged, and provoked to get
still more; and instead of coming to Cesarea, as he ought to have done,
and quenching the flame of war, which was beginning thence, and so
taking away the occasion of any disturbances, on which account it was
that he had received a reward [of eight talents], he marched hastily
with an army of horsemen and footmen against Jerusalem, that he might
gain his will by the arms of the Romans, and might, by his terror, and
by his threatenings, bring the city into subjection.

7. But the people were desirous of making Florus ashamed of his attempt,
and met his soldiers with acclamations, and put themselves in order
to receive him very submissively. But he sent Capito, a centurion,
beforehand, with fifty soldiers, to bid them go back, and not now make
a show of receiving him in an obliging manner, whom they had so foully
reproached before; and said that it was incumbent on them, in case they
had generous souls, and were free speakers, to jest upon him to his
face, and appear to be lovers of liberty, not only in words, but with
their weapons also. With this message was the multitude amazed; and
upon the coming of Capito's horsemen into the midst of them, they were
dispersed before they could salute Florus, or manifest their submissive
behavior to him. Accordingly, they retired to their own houses, and
spent that night in fear and confusion of face.

8. Now at this time Florus took up his quarters at the palace; and on
the next day he had his tribunal set before it, and sat upon it, when
the high priests, and the men of power, and those of the greatest
eminence in the city, came all before that tribunal; upon which Florus
commanded them to deliver up to him those that had reproached him, and
told them that they should themselves partake of the vengeance to them
belonging, if they did not produce the criminals; but these demonstrated
that the people were peaceably disposed, and they begged forgiveness for
those that had spoken amiss; for that it was no wonder at all that in
so great a multitude there should be some more daring than they ought to
be, and, by reason of their younger age, foolish also; and that it was
impossible to distinguish those that offended from the rest, while every
one was sorry for what he had done, and denied it out of fear of what
would follow: that he ought, however, to provide for the peace of the
nation, and to take such counsels as might preserve the city for the
Romans, and rather for the sake of a great number of innocent people to
forgive a few that were guilty, than for the sake of a few of the wicked
to put so large and good a body of men into disorder.

9. Florus was more provoked at this, and called out aloud to the
soldiers to plunder that which was called the Upper Market-place, and to
slay such as they met with. So the soldiers, taking this exhortation of
their commander in a sense agreeable to their desire of gain, did not
only plunder the place they were sent to, but forcing themselves into
every house, they slew its inhabitants; so the citizens fled along
the narrow lanes, and the soldiers slew those that they caught, and
no method of plunder was omitted; they also caught many of the quiet
people, and brought them before Florus, whom he first chastised with
stripes, and then crucified. Accordingly, the whole number of those that
were destroyed that day, with their wives and children, [for they did
not spare even the infants themselves,] was about three thousand and six
hundred. And what made this calamity the heavier was this new method
of Roman barbarity; for Florus ventured then to do what no one had done
before, that is, to have men of the equestrian order whipped 21 and
nailed to the cross before his tribunal; who, although they were by
birth Jews, yet were they of Roman dignity notwithstanding.






CHAPTER 15.


     Concerning Bernice's Petition To Florus, To Spare The Jews,
     But In Vain; As Also How, After The Seditious Flame Was
     Quenched, It Was Kindled Again By Florus.

1. About this very time king Agrippa was going to Alexandria, to
congratulate Alexander upon his having obtained the government of Egypt
from Nero; but as his sister Bernice was come to Jerusalem, and saw the
wicked practices of the soldiers, she was sorely affected at it, and
frequently sent the masters of her horse and her guards to Florus, and
begged of him to leave off these slaughters; but he would not comply
with her request, nor have any regard either to the multitude of those
already slain, or to the nobility of her that interceded, but only to
the advantage he should make by this plundering; nay, this violence of
the soldiers brake out to such a degree of madness, that it spent itself
on the queen herself; for they did not only torment and destroy those
whom they had caught under her very eyes, but indeed had killed herself
also, unless she had prevented them by flying to the palace, and had
staid there all night with her guards, which she had about her for fear
of an insult from the soldiers. Now she dwelt then at Jerusalem, in
order to perform a vow 22 which she had made to God; for it is usual
with those that had been either afflicted with a distemper, or with any
other distresses, to make vows; and for thirty days before they are to
offer their sacrifices, to abstain from wine, and to shave the hair of
their head. Which things Bernice was now performing, and stood barefoot
before Florus's tribunal, and besought him [to spare the Jews]. Yet
could she neither have any reverence paid to her, nor could she escape
without some danger of being slain herself.

2. This happened upon the sixteenth day of the month Artemisius [Jyar].
Now, on the next day, the multitude, who were in a great agony, ran
together to the Upper Market-place, and made the loudest lamentations
for those that had perished; and the greatest part of the cries were
such as reflected on Florus; at which the men of power were affrighted,
together with the high priests, and rent their garments, and fell down
before each of them, and besought them to leave off, and not to provoke
Florus to some incurable procedure, besides what they had already
suffered. Accordingly, the multitude complied immediately, out of
reverence to those that had desired it of them, and out of the hope they
had that Florus would do them no more injuries.

3. So Florus was troubled that the disturbances were over, and
endeavored to kindle that flame again, and sent for the high priests,
with the other eminent persons, and said the only demonstration that the
people would not make any other innovations should be this, that they
must go out and meet the soldiers that were ascending from Cesarea,
whence two cohorts were coming; and while these men were exhorting
the multitude so to do, he sent beforehand, and gave directions to the
centurions of the cohorts, that they should give notice to those that
were under them not to return the Jews' salutations; and that if they
made any reply to his disadvantage, they should make use of their
weapons. Now the high priests assembled the multitude in the temple, and
desired them to go and meet the Romans, and to salute the cohorts very
civilly, before their miserable case should become incurable. Now
the seditious part would not comply with these persuasions; but the
consideration of those that had been destroyed made them incline to
those that were the boldest for action.

4. At this time it was that every priest, and every servant of God,
brought out the holy vessels, and the ornamental garments wherein they
used to minister in sacred things. The harpers also, and the singers of
hymns, came out with their instruments of music, and fell down before
the multitude, and begged of them that they would preserve those holy
ornaments to them, and not provoke the Romans to carry off those sacred
treasures. You might also see then the high priests themselves, with
dust sprinkled in great plenty upon their heads, with bosoms deprived of
any covering but what was rent; these besought every one of the eminent
men by name, and the multitude in common, that they would not for a
small offense betray their country to those that were desirous to have
it laid waste; saying, "What benefit will it bring to the soldiers to
have a salutation from the Jews? or what amendment of your affairs will
it bring you, if you do not now go out to meet them? and that if they
saluted them civilly, all handle would be cut off from Florus to begin
a war; that they should thereby gain their country, and freedom from all
further sufferings; and that, besides, it would be a sign of great
want of command of themselves, if they should yield to a few seditious
persons, while it was fitter for them who were so great a people to
force the others to act soberly."

5. By these persuasions, which they used to the multitude and to the
seditious, they restrained some by threatenings, and others by the
reverence that was paid them. After this they led them out, and they met
the soldiers quietly, and after a composed manner, and when they were
come up with them, they saluted them; but when they made no answer,
the seditious exclaimed against Florus, which was the signal given for
falling upon them. The soldiers therefore encompassed them presently,
and struck them with their clubs; and as they fled away, the horsemen
trampled them down, so that a great many fell down dead by the strokes
of the Romans, and more by their own violence in crushing one another.
Now there was a terrible crowding about the gates, and while every
body was making haste to get before another, the flight of them all was
retarded, and a terrible destruction there was among those that fell
down, for they were suffocated, and broken to pieces by the multitude of
those that were uppermost; nor could any of them be distinguished by
his relations in order to the care of his funeral; the soldiers also who
beat them, fell upon those whom they overtook, without showing them any
mercy, and thrust the multitude through the place called Bezetha, 23 as
they forced their way, in order to get in and seize upon the temple, and
the tower Antonia. Florus also being desirous to get those places into
his possession, brought such as were with him out of the king's palace,
and would have compelled them to get as far as the citadel [Antonia;]
but his attempt failed, for the people immediately turned back upon him,
and stopped the violence of his attempt; and as they stood upon the tops
of their houses, they threw their darts at the Romans, who, as they were
sorely galled thereby, because those weapons came from above, and they
were not able to make a passage through the multitude, which stopped up
the narrow passages, they retired to the camp which was at the palace.

6. But for the seditious, they were afraid lest Florus should come
again, and get possession of the temple, through Antonia; so they got
immediately upon those cloisters of the temple that joined to Antonia,
and cut them down. This cooled the avarice of Florus; for whereas he
was eager to obtain the treasures of God [in the temple], and on that
account was desirous of getting into Antonia, as soon as the cloisters
were broken down, he left off his attempt; he then sent for the high
priests and the sanhedrim, and told them that he was indeed himself
going out of the city, but that he would leave them as large a garrison
as they should desire. Hereupon they promised that they would make no
innovations, in case he would leave them one band; but not that which
had fought with the Jews, because the multitude bore ill-will against
that band on account of what they had suffered from it; so he changed
the band as they desired, and, with the rest of his forces, returned to
Cesarea.






CHAPTER 16.


     Cestius Sends Neopolitanus The Tribune To See In What
     Condition The Affairs Of The Jews Were. Agrippa Makes A
     Speech To The People Of The Jews That He May Divert Them
     From Their Intentions Of Making War With The Romans.

1. However, Florus contrived another way to oblige the Jews to begin
the war, and sent to Cestius, and accused the Jews falsely of revolting
[from the Roman government], and imputed the beginning of the former
fight to them, and pretended they had been the authors of that
disturbance, wherein they were only the sufferers. Yet were not the
governors of Jerusalem silent upon this occasion, but did themselves
write to Cestius, as did Bernice also, about the illegal practices of
which Florus had been guilty against the city; who, upon reading both
accounts, consulted with his captains [what he should do]. Now some
of them thought it best for Cestius to go up with his army, either to
punish the revolt, if it was real, or to settle the Roman affairs on a
surer foundation, if the Jews continued quiet under them; but he thought
it best himself to send one of his intimate friends beforehand, to
see the state of affairs, and to give him a faithful account of the
intentions of the Jews. Accordingly, he sent one of his tribunes, whose
name was Neopolitanus, who met with king Agrippa as he was returning
from Alexandria, at Jamnia, and told him who it was that sent him, and
on what errands he was sent.

2. And here it was that the high priests, and men of power among the
Jews, as well as the sanhedrim, came to congratulate the king [upon his
safe return]; and after they had paid him their respects, they lamented
their own calamities, and related to him what barbarous treatment
they had met with from Florus. At which barbarity Agrippa had great
indignation, but transferred, after a subtle manner, his anger towards
those Jews whom he really pitied, that he might beat down their high
thoughts of themselves, and would have them believe that they had
not been so unjustly treated, in order to dissuade them from avenging
themselves. So these great men, as of better understanding than the
rest, and desirous of peace, because of the possessions they had,
understood that this rebuke which the king gave them was intended
for their good; but as to the people, they came sixty furlongs out of
Jerusalem, and congratulated both Agrippa and Neopolitanus; but the
wives of those that had been slain came running first of all and
lamenting. The people also, when they heard their mourning, fell into
lamentations also, and besought Agrippa to assist them: they also
cried out to Neopolitanus, and complained of the many miseries they had
endured under Florus; and they showed them, when they were come into the
city, how the market-place was made desolate, and the houses plundered.
They then persuaded Neopolitanus, by the means of Agrippa, that he would
walk round the city, with one only servant, as far as Siloam, that he
might inform himself that the Jews submitted to all the rest of the
Romans, and were only displeased at Florus, by reason of his exceeding
barbarity to them. So he walked round, and had sufficient experience
of the good temper the people were in, and then went up to the temple,
where he called the multitude together, and highly commended them for
their fidelity to the Romans, and earnestly exhorted them to keep the
peace; and having performed such parts of Divine worship at the temple
as he was allowed to do, he returned to Cestius.

3. But as for the multitude of the Jews, they addressed themselves to
the king, and to the high priests, and desired they might have leave to
send ambassadors to Nero against Florus, and not by their silence afford
a suspicion that they had been the occasions of such great slaughters
as had been made, and were disposed to revolt, alleging that they
should seem to have been the first beginners of the war, if they did not
prevent the report by showing who it was that began it; and it appeared
openly that they would not be quiet, if any body should hinder them
from sending such an embassage. But Agrippa, although he thought it
too dangerous a thing for them to appoint men to go as the accusers of
Florus, yet did he not think it fit for him to overlook them, as
they were in a disposition for war. He therefore called the multitude
together into a large gallery, and placed his sister Bernice in the
house of the Asamoneans, that she might be seen by them, [which house
was over the gallery, at the passage to the upper city, where the bridge
joined the temple to the gallery,] and spake to them as follows:

4.24 "Had I perceived that you were all zealously disposed to go to war
with the Romans, and that the purer and more sincere part of the people
did not propose to live in peace, I had not come out to you, nor been
so bold as to give you counsel; for all discourses that tend to persuade
men to do what they ought to do are superfluous, when the hearers are
agreed to do the contrary. But because some are earnest to go to war
because they are young, and without experience of the miseries it
brings, and because some are for it out of an unreasonable expectation
of regaining their liberty, and because others hope to get by it, and
are therefore earnestly bent upon it, that in the confusion of your
affairs they may gain what belongs to those that are too weak to resist
them, I have thought proper to get you all together, and to say to
you what I think to be for your advantage; that so the former may grow
wiser, and change their minds, and that the best men may come to no harm
by the ill conduct of some others. And let not any one be tumultuous
against me, in case what they hear me say do not please them; for as
to those that admit of no cure, but are resolved upon a revolt, it
will still be in their power to retain the same sentiments after my
exhortation is over; but still my discourse will fall to the ground,
even with a relation to those that have a mind to hear me, unless
you will all keep silence. I am well aware that many make a tragical
exclamation concerning the injuries that have been offered you by your
procurators, and concerning the glorious advantages of liberty; but
before I begin the inquiry, who you are that must go to war, and who
they are against whom you must fight, I shall first separate those
pretenses that are by some connected together; for if you aim at
avenging yourselves on those that have done you injury, why do you
pretend this to be a war for recovering your liberty? but if you think
all servitude intolerable, to what purpose serve your complaint against
your particular governors? for if they treated you with moderation, it
would still be equally an unworthy thing to be in servitude. Consider
now the several cases that may be supposed, how little occasion there is
for your going to war. Your first occasion is the accusations you have
to make against your procurators; now here you ought to be submissive
to those in authority, and not give them any provocation; but when
you reproach men greatly for small offenses, you excite those whom you
reproach to be your adversaries; for this will only make them leave off
hurting you privately, and with some degree of modesty, and to lay what
you have waste openly. Now nothing so much damps the force of strokes as
bearing them with patience; and the quietness of those who are injured
diverts the injurious persons from afflicting. But let us take it for
granted that the Roman ministers are injurious to you, and are incurably
severe; yet are they not all the Romans who thus injure you; nor hath
Caesar, against whom you are going to make war, injured you: it is not
by their command that any wicked governor is sent to you; for they who
are in the west cannot see those that are in the east; nor indeed is it
easy for them there even to hear what is done in these parts. Now it is
absurd to make war with a great many for the sake of one, to do so with
such mighty people for a small cause; and this when these people are not
able to know of what you complain: nay, such crimes as we complain of
may soon be corrected, for the same procurator will not continue
for ever; and probable it is that the successors will come with more
moderate inclinations. But as for war, if it be once begun, it is not
easily laid down again, nor borne without calamities coming therewith.
However, as to the desire of recovering your liberty, it is unseasonable
to indulge it so late; whereas you ought to have labored earnestly in
old time that you might never have lost it; for the first experience of
slavery was hard to be endured, and the struggle that you might never
have been subject to it would have been just; but that slave who hath
been once brought into subjection, and then runs away, is rather a
refractory slave than a lover of liberty; for it was then the proper
time for doing all that was possible, that you might never have admitted
the Romans [into your city], when Pompey came first into the country.
But so it was, that our ancestors and their kings, who were in much
better circumstances than we are, both as to money, and strong bodies,
and [valiant] souls, did not bear the onset of a small body of the Roman
army. And yet you, who have now accustomed yourselves to obedience from
one generation to another, and who are so much inferior to those who
first submitted, in your circumstances will venture to oppose the entire
empire of the Romans. While those Athenians, who, in order to preserve
the liberty of Greece, did once set fire to their own city; who pursued
Xerxes, that proud prince, when he sailed upon the land, and walked upon
the sea, and could not be contained by the seas, but conducted such an
army as was too broad for Europe; and made him run away like a fugitive
in a single ship, and brake so great a part of Asia at the Lesser
Salamis; are yet at this time servants to the Romans; and those
injunctions which are sent from Italy become laws to the principal
governing city of Greece. Those Lacedemonians also who got the great
victories at Thermopylae and Platea, and had Agesilaus [for their king],
and searched every corner of Asia, are contented to admit the same
lords. Those Macedonians also, who still fancy what great men their
Philip and Alexander were, and see that the latter had promised them
the empire over the world, these bear so great a change, and pay their
obedience to those whom fortune hath advanced in their stead. Moreover,
ten thousand ether nations there are who had greater reason than we to
claim their entire liberty, and yet do submit. You are the only people
who think it a disgrace to be servants to those to whom all the world
hath submitted. What sort of an army do you rely on? What are the arms
you depend on? Where is your fleet, that may seize upon the Roman
seas? and where are those treasures which may be sufficient for your
undertakings? Do you suppose, I pray you, that you are to make war with
the Egyptians, and with the Arabians? Will you not carefully reflect
upon the Roman empire? Will you not estimate your own weakness? Hath not
your army been often beaten even by your neighboring nations, while the
power of the Romans is invincible in all parts of the habitable earth?
nay, rather they seek for somewhat still beyond that; for all Euphrates
is not a sufficient boundary for them on the east side, nor the Danube
on the north; and for their southern limit, Libya hath been searched
over by them, as far as countries uninhabited, as is Cadiz their limit
on the west; nay, indeed, they have sought for another habitable earth
beyond the ocean, and have carried their arms as far as such British
islands as were never known before. What therefore do you pretend to?
Are you richer than the Gauls, stronger than the Germans, wiser than
the Greeks, more numerous than all men upon the habitable earth? What
confidence is it that elevates you to oppose the Romans? Perhaps it will
be said, It is hard to endure slavery. Yes; but how much harder is this
to the Greeks, who were esteemed the noblest of all people under the
sun! These, though they inhabit in a large country, are in subjection to
six bundles of Roman rods. It is the same case with the Macedonians,
who have juster reason to claim their liberty than you have. What is
the case of five hundred cities of Asia? Do they not submit to a single
governor, and to the consular bundle of rods? What need I speak of the
Henlochi, and Colchi and the nation of Tauri, those that inhabit the
Bosphorus, and the nations about Pontus, and Meotis, who formerly
knew not so much as a lord of their own, but are now subject to three
thousand armed men, and where forty long ships keep the sea in peace,
which before was not navigable, and very tempestuous? How strong a plea
may Bithynia, and Cappadocia, and the people of Pamphylia, the Lycians,
and Cilicians, put in for liberty! But they are made tributary without
an army. What are the circumstances of the Thracians, whose country
extends in breadth five days' journey, and in length seven, and is of a
much more harsh constitution, and much more defensible, than yours, and
by the rigor of its cold sufficient to keep off armies from attacking
them? do not they submit to two thousand men of the Roman garrisons? Are
not the Illyrlans, who inhabit the country adjoining, as far as Dalmatia
and the Danube, governed by barely two legions? by which also they put a
stop to the incursions of the Daeians. And for the Dalmatians, who have
made such frequent insurrections in order to regain their liberty, and
who could never before be so thoroughly subdued, but that they always
gathered their forces together again, revolted, yet are they now very
quiet under one Roman legion. Moreover, great advantages might provoke
any people to revolt, the Gauls might do it best of all, as being so
thoroughly walled round by nature; on the east side by the Alps, on the
north by the river Rhine, on the south by the Pyrenean mountains, and
on the west by the ocean. Now although these Gauls have such obstacles
before them to prevent any attack upon them, and have no fewer than
three hundred and five nations among them, nay have, as one may say,
the fountains of domestic happiness within themselves, and send out
plentiful streams of happiness over almost the whole world, these bear
to be tributary to the Romans, and derive their prosperous condition
from them; and they undergo this, not because they are of effeminate
minds, or because they are of an ignoble stock, as having borne a war
of eighty years in order to preserve their liberty; but by reason of
the great regard they have to the power of the Romans, and their good
fortune, which is of greater efficacy than their arms. These Gauls,
therefore, are kept in servitude by twelve hundred soldiers, which are
hardly so many as are their cities; nor hath the gold dug out of the
mines of Spain been sufficient for the support of a war to preserve
their liberty, nor could their vast distance from the Romans by land
and by sea do it; nor could the martial tribes of the Lusitanians and
Spaniards escape; no more could the ocean, with its tide, which yet was
terrible to the ancient inhabitants. Nay, the Romans have extended their
arms beyond the pillars of Hercules, and have walked among the clouds,
upon the Pyrenean mountains, and have subdued these nations. And one
legion is a sufficient guard for these people, although they were so
hard to be conquered, and at a distance so remote from Rome. Who is
there among you that hath not heard of the great number of the Germans?
You have, to be sure, yourselves seen them to be strong and tall, and
that frequently, since the Romans have them among their captives every
where; yet these Germans, who dwell in an immense country, who have
minds greater than their bodies, and a soul that despises death, and
who are in rage more fierce than wild beasts, have the Rhine for the
boundary of their enterprises, and are tamed by eight Roman legions.
Such of them as were taken captive became their servants; and the rest
of the entire nation were obliged to save themselves by flight. Do you
also, who depend on the walls of Jerusalem, consider what a wall the
Britons had; for the Romans sailed away to them, an subdued them while
they were encompassed by the ocean, and inhabited an island that is not
less than the [continent of this] habitable earth; and four legions are
a sufficient guard to so large an island And why should I speak much
more about this matter, while the Parthians, that most warlike body
of men, and lords of so many nations, and encompassed with such mighty
forces, send hostages to the Romans? whereby you may see, if you please,
even in Italy, the noblest nation of the East, under the notion of
peace, submitting to serve them. Now when almost all people under the
sun submit to the Roman arms, will you be the only people that make war
against them? and this without regarding the fate of the Carthaginians,
who, in the midst of their brags of the great Hannibal, and the nobility
of their Phoenician original, fell by the hand of Scipio. Nor indeed
have the Cyrenians, derived from the Lacedemonians, nor the Marmaridite,
a nation extended as far as the regions uninhabitable for want of
water, nor have the Syrtes, a place terrible to such as barely hear
it described, the Nasamons and Moors, and the immense multitude of the
Numidians, been able to put a stop to the Roman valor. And as for the
third part of the habitable earth, [Africa,] whose nations are so many
that it is not easy to number them, and which is bounded by the Atlantic
Sea and the pillars of Hercules, and feeds an innumerable multitude
of Ethiopians, as far as the Red Sea, these have the Romans subdued
entirely. And besides the annual fruits of the earth, which maintain
the multitude of the Romans for eight months in the year, this, over and
above, pays all sorts of tribute, and affords revenues suitable to
the necessities of the government. Nor do they, like you, esteem such
injunctions a disgrace to them, although they have but one Roman legion
that abides among them. And indeed what occasion is there for showing
you the power of the Romans over remote countries, when it is so easy to
learn it from Egypt, in your neighborhood? This country is extended as
far as the Ethiopians, and Arabia the Happy, and borders upon India; it
hath seven millions five hundred thousand men, besides the inhabitants
of Alexandria, as may be learned from the revenue of the poll tax; yet
it is not ashamed to submit to the Roman government, although it hath
Alexandria as a grand temptation to a revolt, by reason it is so full of
people and of riches, and is besides exceeding large, its length being
thirty furlongs, and its breadth no less than ten; and it pays more
tribute to the Romans in one month than you do in a year; nay, besides
what it pays in money, it sends corn to Rome that supports it for four
months [in the year]: it is also walled round on all sides, either by
almost impassable deserts, or seas that have no havens, or by rivers,
or by lakes; yet have none of these things been found too strong for
the Roman good fortune; however, two legions that lie in that city are a
bridle both for the remoter parts of Egypt, and for the parts inhabited
by the more noble Macedonians. Where then are those people whom you are
to have for your auxiliaries? Must they come from the parts of the world
that are uninhabited? for all that are in the habitable earth are [under
the] Romans. Unless any of you extend his hopes as far as beyond the
Euphrates, and suppose that those of your own nation that dwell in
Adiabene will come to your assistance; but certainly these will not
embarrass themselves with an unjustifiable war, nor, if they should
follow such ill advice, will the Parthians permit them so to do; for
it is their concern to maintain the truce that is between them and the
Romans, and they will be supposed to break the covenants between them,
if any under their government march against the Romans. What remains,
therefore, is this, that you have recourse to Divine assistance; but
this is already on the side of the Romans; for it is impossible that so
vast an empire should be settled without God's providence. Reflect upon
it, how impossible it is for your zealous observations of your religious
customs to be here preserved, which are hard to be observed even when
you fight with those whom you are able to conquer; and how can you
then most of all hope for God's assistance, when, by being forced to
transgress his law, you will make him turn his face from you? and if you
do observe the custom of the sabbath days, and will not be revealed
on to do any thing thereon, you will easily be taken, as were your
forefathers by Pompey, who was the busiest in his siege on those days on
which the besieged rested. But if in time of war you transgress the law
of your country, I cannot tell on whose account you will afterward go
to war; for your concern is but one, that you do nothing against any of
your forefathers; and how will you call upon God to assist you, when you
are voluntarily transgressing against his religion? Now all men that go
to war do it either as depending on Divine or on human assistance; but
since your going to war will cut off both those assistances, those that
are for going to war choose evident destruction. What hinders you from
slaying your children and wives with your own hands, and burning this
most excellent native city of yours? for by this mad prank you will,
however, escape the reproach of being beaten. But it were best, O
my friends, it were best, while the vessel is still in the haven, to
foresee the impending storm, and not to set sail out of the port into
the middle of the hurricanes; for we justly pity those who fall into
great misfortunes without fore-seeing them; but for him who rushes
into manifest ruin, he gains reproaches [instead of commiseration].
But certainly no one can imagine that you can enter into a war as by
agreement, or that when the Romans have got you under their power, they
will use you with moderation, or will not rather, for an example to
other nations, burn your holy city, and utterly destroy your whole
nation; for those of you who shall survive the war will not be able to
find a place whither to flee, since all men have the Romans for their
lords already, or are afraid they shall have hereafter. Nay, indeed, the
danger concerns not those Jews that dwell here only, but those of
them which dwell in other cities also; for there is no people upon the
habitable earth which have not some portion of you among them, whom your
enemies will slay, in case you go to war, and on that account also; and
so every city which hath Jews in it will be filled with slaughter for
the sake of a few men, and they who slay them will be pardoned; but if
that slaughter be not made by them, consider how wicked a thing it is to
take arms against those that are so kind to you. Have pity, therefore,
if not on your children and wives, yet upon this your metropolis, and
its sacred walls; spare the temple, and preserve the holy house, with
its holy furniture, for yourselves; for if the Romans get you under
their power, they will no longer abstain from them, when their former
abstinence shall have been so ungratefully requited. I call to witness
your sanctuary, and the holy angels of God, and this country common
to us all, that I have not kept back any thing that is for your
preservation; and if you will follow that advice which you ought to do,
you will have that peace which will be common to you and to me; but if
you indulge four passions, you will run those hazards which I shall be
free from."

5. When Agrippa had spoken thus, both he and his sister wept, and by
their tears repressed a great deal of the violence of the people; but
still they cried out, that they would not fight against the Romans, but
against Florus, on account of what they had suffered by his means. To
which Agrippa replied, that what they had already done was like such as
make war against the Romans; "for you have not paid the tribute which is
due to Caesar 25 and you have cut off the cloisters [of the temple] from
joining to the tower Antonia. You will therefore prevent any occasion
of revolt if you will but join these together again, and if you will but
pay your tribute; for the citadel does not now belong to Florus, nor are
you to pay the tribute money to Florus."






CHAPTER 17.


     How The War Of The Jews With The Romans Began, And
     Concerning Manahem.

1. This advice the people hearkened to, and went up into the temple with
the king and Bernice, and began to rebuild the cloisters; the rulers
also and senators divided themselves into the villages, and collected
the tributes, and soon got together forty talents, which was the sum
that was deficient. And thus did Agrippa then put a stop to that war
which was threatened. Moreover, he attempted to persuade the multitude
to obey Florus, until Caesar should send one to succeed him; but they
were hereby more provoked, and cast reproaches upon the king, and
got him excluded out of the city; nay, some of the seditious had the
impudence to throw stones at him. So when the king saw that the violence
of those that were for innovations was not to be restrained, and being
very angry at the contumelies he had received, he sent their rulers,
together with their men of power, to Florus, to Cesarea, that he might
appoint whom he thought fit to collect the tribute in the country, while
he retired into his own kingdom.

2. And at this time it was that some of those that principally excited
the people to go to war made an assault upon a certain fortress called
Masada. They took it by treachery, and slew the Romans that were there,
and put others of their own party to keep it. At the same time Eleazar,
the son of Ananias the high priest, a very bold youth, who was at that
time governor of the temple, persuaded those that officiated in the
Divine service to receive no gift or sacrifice for any foreigner.
And this was the true beginning of our war with the Romans; for they
rejected the sacrifice of Caesar on this account; and when many of the
high priests and principal men besought them not to omit the sacrifice,
which it was customary for them to offer for their princes, they would
not be prevailed upon. These relied much upon their multitude, for the
most flourishing part of the innovators assisted them; but they had the
chief regard to Eleazar, the governor of the temple.

3. Hereupon the men of power got together, and conferred with the high
priests, as did also the principal of the Pharisees; and thinking all
was at stake, and that their calamities were becoming incurable, took
counsel what was to be done. Accordingly, they determined to try what
they could do with the seditious by words, and assembled the people
before the brazen gate, which was that gate of the inner temple [court
of the priests] which looked toward the sun-rising. And, in the first
place, they showed the great indignation they had at this attempt for a
revolt, and for their bringing so great a war upon their country; after
which they confuted their pretense as unjustifiable, and told them that
their forefathers had adorned their temple in great part with donations
bestowed on them by foreigners, and had always received what had been
presented to them from foreign nations; and that they had been so
far from rejecting any person's sacrifice [which would be the highest
instance of impiety,] that they had themselves placed those donation
about the temple which were still visible, and had remained there so
long a time; that they did now irritate the Romans to take arms against
them, and invited them to make war upon them, and brought up novel rules
of a strange Divine worship, and determined to run the hazard of
having their city condemned for impiety, while they would not allow any
foreigner, but Jews only, either to sacrifice or to worship therein.
And if such a law should be introduced in the case of a single private
person only, he would have indignation at it, as an instance of
inhumanity determined against him; while they have no regard to the
Romans or to Caesar, and forbid even their oblations to be received
also; that however they cannot but fear, lest, by thus rejecting their
sacrifices, they shall not be allowed to offer their own; and that this
city will lose its principality, unless they grow wiser quickly, and
restore the sacrifices as formerly, and indeed amend the injury [they
have offered foreigners] before the report of it comes to the ears of
those that have been injured.

4. And as they said these things, they produced those priests that were
skillful in the customs of their country, who made the report that all
their forefathers had received the sacrifices from foreign nations. But
still not one of the innovators would hearken to what was said; nay,
those that ministered about the temple would not attend their Divine
service, but were preparing matters for beginning the war. So the men of
power perceiving that the sedition was too hard for them to subdue, and
that the danger which would arise from the Romans would come upon them
first of all, endeavored to save themselves, and sent ambassadors, some
to Florus, the chief of which was Simon the son of Ananias; and others
to Agrippa, among whom the most eminent were Saul, and Antipas, and
Costobarus, who were of the king's kindred; and they desired of them
both that they would come with an army to the city, and cut off the
seditious before it should be too hard to be subdued. Now this terrible
message was good news to Florus; and because his design was to have a
war kindled, he gave the ambassadors no answer at all. But Agrippa was
equally solicitous for those that were revolting, and for those against
whom the war was to be made, and was desirous to preserve the Jews for
the Romans, and the temple and metropolis for the Jews; he was also
sensible that it was not for his own advantage that the disturbances
should proceed; so he sent three thousand horsemen to the assistance
of the people out of Auranitis, and Batanea, and Trachonitis, and these
under Darius, the master of his horse, and Philip the son of Jacimus,
the general of his army.

5. Upon this the men of power, with the high priests, as also all the
part of the multitude that were desirous of peace, took courage, and
seized upon the upper city [Mount Sion;] for the seditious part had the
lower city and the temple in their power; so they made use of stones and
slings perpetually against one another, and threw darts continually
on both sides; and sometimes it happened that they made incursions
by troops, and fought it out hand to hand, while the seditious were
superior in boldness, but the king's soldiers in skill. These last
strove chiefly to gain the temple, and to drive those out of it who
profaned it; as did the seditious, with Eleazar, besides what they
had already, labor to gain the upper city. Thus were there perpetual
slaughters on both sides for seven days' time; but neither side would
yield up the parts they had seized on.

6. Now the next day was the festival of Xylophory; upon which the custom
was for every one to bring wood for the altar [that there might never be
a want of fuel for that fire which was unquenchable and always burning].
Upon that day they excluded the opposite party from the observation of
this part of religion. And when they had joined to themselves many of
the Sicarii, who crowded in among the weaker people, [that was the name
for such robbers as had under their bosoms swords called Sicae,] they
grew bolder, and carried their undertaking further; insomuch that the
king's soldiers were overpowered by their multitude and boldness; and
so they gave way, and were driven out of the upper city by force. The
others then set fire to the house of Ananias the high priest, and to the
palaces of Agrippa and Bernice; after which they carried the fire to
the place where the archives were reposited, and made haste to burn the
contracts belonging to their creditors, and thereby to dissolve their
obligations for paying their debts; and this was done in order to
gain the multitude of those who had been debtors, and that they might
persuade the poorer sort to join in their insurrection with safety
against the more wealthy; so the keepers of the records fled away, and
the rest set fire to them. And when they had thus burnt down the nerves
of the city, they fell upon their enemies; at which time some of the men
of power, and of the high priests, went into the vaults under ground,
and concealed themselves, while others fled with the king's soldiers
to the upper palace, and shut the gates immediately; among whom were
Ananias the high priest, and the ambassadors that had been sent to
Agrippa. And now the seditious were contented with the victory they had
gotten, and the buildings they had burnt down, and proceeded no further.

7. But on the next day, which was the fifteenth of the month Lous, [Ab,]
they made an assault upon Antonia, and besieged the garrison which was
in it two days, and then took the garrison, and slew them, and set the
citadel on fire; after which they marched to the palace, whither the
king's soldiers were fled, and parted themselves into four bodies, and
made an attack upon the walls. As for those that were within it, no one
had the courage to sally out, because those that assaulted them were
so numerous; but they distributed themselves into the breast-works and
turrets, and shot at the besiegers, whereby many of the robbers fell
under the walls; nor did they cease to fight one with another either by
night or by day, while the seditious supposed that those within would
grow weary for want of food, and those without supposed the others would
do the like by the tediousness of the siege.

8. In the mean time, one Manahem, the son of Judas, that was called the
Galilean, [who was a very cunning sophister, and had formerly reproached
the Jews under Cyrenius, that after God they were subject to the
Romans,] took some of the men of note with him, and retired to Masada,
where he broke open king Herod's armory, and gave arms not only to his
own people, but to other robbers also. These he made use of for a guard,
and returned in the state of a king to Jerusalem; he became the leader
of the sedition, and gave orders for continuing the siege; but they
wanted proper instruments, and it was not practicable to undermine the
wall, because the darts came down upon them from above. But still they
dug a mine from a great distance under one of the towers, and made it
totter; and having done that, they set on fire what was combustible, and
left it; and when the foundations were burnt below, the tower fell down
suddenly. Yet did they then meet with another wall that had been built
within, for the besieged were sensible beforehand of what they were
doing, and probably the tower shook as it was undermining; so they
provided themselves of another fortification; which when the besiegers
unexpectedly saw, while they thought they had already gained the place,
they were under some consternation. However, those that were within sent
to Manahem, and to the other leaders of the sedition, and desired
they might go out upon a capitulation: this was granted to the king's
soldiers and their own countrymen only, who went out accordingly; but
the Romans that were left alone were greatly dejected, for they were not
able to force their way through such a multitude; and to desire them to
give them their right hand for their security, they thought it would be
a reproach to them; and besides, if they should give it them, they durst
not depend upon it; so they deserted their camp, as easily taken,
and ran away to the royal towers,--that called Hippicus, that called
Phasaelus, and that called Mariamne. But Manahem and his party fell upon
the place whence the soldiers were fled, and slew as many of them as
they could catch, before they got up to the towers, and plundered what
they left behind them, and set fire to their camp. This was executed on
the sixth day of the month Gorpieus [Elul].

9. But on the next day the high priest was caught where he had concealed
himself in an aqueduct; he was slain, together with Hezekiah his
brother, by the robbers: hereupon the seditious besieged the towers, and
kept them guarded, lest any one of the soldiers should escape. Now the
overthrow of the places of strength, and the death of the high priest
Ananias, so puffed up Manahem, that he became barbarously cruel; and
as he thought he had no antagonist to dispute the management of affairs
with him, he was no better than an insupportable tyrant; but Eleazar
and his party, when words had passed between them, how it was not proper
when they revolted from the Romans, out of the desire of liberty, to
betray that liberty to any of their own people, and to bear a lord,
who, though he should be guilty of no violence, was yet meaner than
themselves; as also, that in case they were obliged to set some one over
their public affairs, it was fitter they should give that privilege to
any one rather than to him; they made an assault upon him in the temple;
for he went up thither to worship in a pompous manner, and adorned
with royal garments, and had his followers with him in their armor. But
Eleazar and his party fell violently upon him, as did also the rest of
the people; and taking up stones to attack him withal, they threw them
at the sophister, and thought, that if he were once ruined, the entire
sedition would fall to the ground. Now Manahem and his party made
resistance for a while; but when they perceived that the whole multitude
were falling upon them, they fled which way every one was able; those
that were caught were slain, and those that hid themselves were searched
for. A few there were of them who privately escaped to Masada, among
whom was Eleazar, the son of Jairus, who was of kin to Manahem, and
acted the part of a tyrant at Masada afterward. As for Manahem himself,
he ran away to the place called Ophla, and there lay skulking in
private; but they took him alive, and drew him out before them all; they
then tortured him with many sorts of torments, and after all slew him,
as they did by those that were captains under him also, and particularly
by the principal instrument of his tyranny, whose name was Apsalom.

10. And, as I said, so far truly the people assisted them, while they
hoped this might afford some amendment to the seditious practices; but
the others were not in haste to put an end to the war, but hoped to
prosecute it with less danger, now they had slain Manahem. It is
true, that when the people earnestly desired that they would leave
off besieging the soldiers, they were the more earnest in pressing it
forward, and this till Metilius, who was the Roman general, sent to
Eleazar, and desired that they would give them security to spare their
lives only; but agreed to deliver up their arms, and what else they had
with them. The others readily complied with their petition, sent to them
Gorion, the son of Nicodemus, and Ananias, the son of Sadduk, and Judas,
the son of Jonathan, that they might give them the security Of their
right hands, and of their oaths; after which Metilius brought down his
soldiers; which soldiers, while they were in arms, were not meddled with
by any of the seditious, nor was there any appearance of treachery; but
as soon as, according to the articles of capitulation, they had all laid
down their shields and their swords, and were under no further suspicion
of any harm, but were going away, Eleazar's men attacked them after a
violent manner, and encompassed them round, and slew them, while they
neither defended themselves, nor entreated for mercy, but only cried out
upon the breach of their articles of capitulation and their oaths. And
thus were all these men barbarously murdered, excepting Metilius; for
when he entreated for mercy, and promised that he would turn Jew, and
be circumcised, they saved him alive, but none else. This loss to the
Romans was but light, there being no more than a few slain out of an
immense army; but still it appeared to be a prelude to the Jews' own
destruction, while men made public lamentation when they saw that such
occasions were afforded for a war as were incurable; that the city
was all over polluted with such abominations, from which it was but
reasonable to expect some vengeance, even though they should escape
revenge from the Romans; so that the city was filled with sadness, and
every one of the moderate men in it were under great disturbance,
as likely themselves to undergo punishment for the wickedness of the
seditious; for indeed it so happened that this murder was perpetrated on
the sabbath day, on which day the Jews have a respite from their works
on account of Divine worship.






CHAPTER 18.


     The Calamities And Slaughters That Came Upon The Jews.

1. Now the people of Cesarea had slain the Jews that were among them
on the very same day and hour [when the soldiers were slain], which
one would think must have come to pass by the direction of Providence;
insomuch that in one hour's time above twenty thousand Jews were killed,
and all Cesarea was emptied of its Jewish inhabitants; for Florus caught
such as ran away, and sent them in bonds to the galleys. Upon which
stroke that the Jews received at Cesarea, the whole nation was greatly
enraged; so they divided themselves into several parties, and laid waste
the villages of the Syrians, and their neighboring cities, Philadelphia,
and Sebonitis, and Gerasa, and Pella, and Scythopolis, and after them
Gadara, and Hippos; and falling upon Gaulonitis, some cities they
destroyed there, and some they set on fire, and then went to Kedasa,
belonging to the Tyrians, and to Ptolemais, and to Gaba, and to Cesarea;
nor was either Sebaste [Samaria] or Askelon able to oppose the violence
with which they were attacked; and when they had burnt these to the
ground; they entirely demolished Anthedon and Gaza; many also of the
villages that were about every one of those cities were plundered, and
an immense slaughter was made of the men who were caught in them.

2. However, the Syrians were even with the Jews in the multitude of
the men whom they slew; for they killed those whom they caught in their
cities, and that not only out of the hatred they bare them, as formerly,
but to prevent the danger under which they were from them; so that the
disorders in all Syria were terrible, and every city was divided into
two armies, encamped one against another, and the preservation of the
one party was in the destruction of the other; so the day time was spent
in shedding of blood, and the night in fear, which was of the two the
more terrible; for when the Syrians thought they had ruined the Jews,
they had the Judaizers in suspicion also; and as each side did not care
to slay those whom they only suspected on the other, so did they
greatly fear them when they were mingled with the other, as if they were
certainly foreigners. Moreover, greediness of gain was a provocation to
kill the opposite party, even to such as had of old appeared very mild
and gentle towards them; for they without fear plundered the effects of
the slain, and carried off the spoils of those whom they slew to their
own houses, as if they had been gained in a set battle; and he was
esteemed a man of honor who got the greatest share, as having prevailed
over the greatest number of his enemies. It was then common to see
cities filled with dead bodies, still lying unburied, and those of old
men, mixed with infants, all dead, and scattered about together; women
also lay amongst them, without any covering for their nakedness: you
might then see the whole province full of inexpressible calamities,
while the dread of still more barbarous practices which were threatened
was every where greater than what had been already perpetrated.

3. And thus far the conflict had been between Jews and foreigners; but
when they made excursions to Scythopolis, they found Jew that acted as
enemies; for as they stood in battle-array with those of Scythopolis,
and preferred their own safety before their relation to us, they fought
against their own countrymen; nay, their alacrity was so very great,
that those of Scythopolis suspected them. These were afraid, therefore,
lest they should make an assault upon the city in the night time, and,
to their great misfortune, should thereby make an apology for themselves
to their own people for their revolt from them. So they commanded them,
that in case they would confirm their agreement and demonstrate their
fidelity to them, who were of a different nation, they should go out of
the city, with their families to a neighboring grove; and when they had
done as they were commanded, without suspecting any thing, the people of
Scythopolis lay still for the interval of two days, to tempt them to be
secure; but on the third night they watched their opportunity, and cut
all their throats, some as they lay unguarded, and some as they lay
asleep. The number that was slain was above thirteen thousand, and then
they plundered them of all that they had.

4. It will deserve our relation what befell Simon; he was the son of
one Saul, a man of reputation among the Jews. This man was distinguished
from the rest by the strength of his body, and the boldness of his
conduct, although he abused them both to the mischieving of his
countrymen; for he came every day and slew a great many of the Jews of
Scythopolis, and he frequently put them to flight, and became himself
alone the cause of his army's conquering. But a just punishment overtook
him for the murders he had committed upon those of the same nation with
him; for when the people of Scythopolis threw their darts at them in the
grove, he drew his sword, but did not attack any of the enemy; for he
saw that he could do nothing against such a multitude; but he cried out
after a very moving manner, and said, "O you people of Scythopolis, I
deservedly suffer for what I have done with relation to you, when I gave
you such security of my fidelity to you, by slaying so many of those
that were related to me. Wherefore we very justly experience the
perfidiousness of foreigners, while we acted after a most wicked manner
against our own nation. I will therefore die, polluted wretch as I am,
by mine own hands; for it is not fit I should die by the hand of our
enemies; and let the same action be to me both a punishment for my great
crimes, and a testimony of my courage to my commendation, that so no one
of our enemies may have it to brag of, that he it was that slew me,
and no one may insult upon me as I fall." Now when he had said this, he
looked round about him upon his family with eyes of commiseration and
of rage [that family consisted of a wife and children, and his aged
parents]; so, in the first place, he caught his father by his grey
hairs, and ran his sword through him, and after him he did the same to
his mother, who willingly received it; and after them he did the like
to his wife and children, every one almost offering themselves to his
sword, as desirous to prevent being slain by their enemies; so when he
had gone over all his family, he stood upon their bodies to be seen
by all, and stretching out his right hand, that his action might be
observed by all, he sheathed his entire sword into his own bowels. This
young man was to be pitied, on account of the strength of his body and
the courage of his soul; but since he had assured foreigners of his
fidelity [against his own countrymen], he suffered deservedly.

5. Besides this murder at Scythopolis, the other cities rose up against
the Jews that were among them; those of Askelon slew two thousand five
hundred, and those of Ptolemais two thousand, and put not a few into
bonds; those of Tyre also put a great number to death, but kept a
greater number in prison; moreover, those of Hippos, and those of
Gadara, did the like while they put to death the boldest of the Jews,
but kept those of whom they were afraid in custody; as did the rest of
the cities of Syria, according as they every one either hated them or
were afraid of them; only the Antiochtans the Sidontans, and Apamians
spared those that dwelt with them, and would not endure either to kill
any of the Jews, or to put them in bonds. And perhaps they spared them,
because their own number was so great that they despised their
attempts. But I think the greatest part of this favor was owing to their
commiseration of those whom they saw to make no innovations. As for the
Gerasans, they did no harm to those that abode with them; and for those
who had a mind to go away, they conducted them as far as their borders
reached.

6. There was also a plot laid against the Jews in Agrippa's kingdom; for
he was himself gone to Cestius Gallus, to Antioch, but had left one
of his companions, whose name was Noarus, to take care of the public
affairs; which Noarus was of kin to king Sohemus. 26 Now there came
certain men seventy in number, out of Batanea, who were the most
considerable for their families and prudence of the rest of the people;
these desired to have an army put into their hands, that if any tumult
should happen, they might have about them a guard sufficient to restrain
such as might rise up against them. This Noarus sent out some of the
king's armed men by night, and slew all those [seventy] men; which bold
action he ventured upon without the consent of Agrippa, and was such
a lover of money, that he chose to be so wicked to his own countrymen,
though he brought ruin on the kingdom thereby; and thus cruelly did he
treat that nation, and this contrary to the laws also, until Agrippa
was informed of it, who did not indeed dare to put him to death, out
of regard to Sohemus; but still he put an end to his procuratorship
immediately. But as to the seditious, they took the citadel which
was called Cypros, and was above Jericho, and cut the throats of the
garrison, and utterly demolished the fortifications. This was about
the same time that the multitude of the Jews that were at Machaerus
persuaded the Romans who were in garrison to leave the place, and
deliver it up to them. These Romans being in great fear, lest the place
should be taken by force, made an agreement with them to depart upon
certain conditions; and when they had obtained the security they
desired, they delivered up the citadel, into which the people of
Machaerus put a garrison for their own security, and held it in their
own power.

7. But for Alexandria, the sedition of the people of the place against
the Jews was perpetual, and this from that very time when Alexander [the
Great], upon finding the readiness of the Jews in assisting him against
the Egyptians, and as a reward for such their assistance, gave them
equal privileges in this city with the Grecians themselves; which
honorary reward Continued among them under his successors, who also set
apart for them a particular place, that they might live without being
polluted [by the Gentiles], and were thereby not so much intermixed with
foreigners as before; they also gave them this further privilege, that
they should be called Macedonians. Nay, when the Romans got possession
of Egypt, neither the first Caesar, nor any one that came after him,
thought of diminishing the honors which Alexander had bestowed on the
Jews. But still conflicts perpetually arose with the Grecians; and
although the governors did every day punish many of them, yet did
the sedition grow worse; but at this time especially, when there were
tumults in other places also, the disorders among them were put into a
greater flame; for when the Alexandrians had once a public assembly, to
deliberate about an embassage they were sending to Nero, a great number
of Jews came flocking to the theater; but when their adversaries saw
them, they immediately cried out, and called them their enemies, and
said they came as spies upon them; upon which they rushed out, and laid
violent hands upon them; and as for the rest, they were slain as they
ran away; but there were three men whom they caught, and hauled them
along, in order to have them burnt alive; but all the Jews came in a
body to defend them, who at first threw stones at the Grecians, but
after that they took lamps, and rushed with violence into the theater,
and threatened that they would burn the people to a man; and this they
had soon done, unless Tiberius Alexander, the governor of the city, had
restrained their passions. However, this man did not begin to teach them
wisdom by arms, but sent among them privately some of the principal men,
and thereby entreated them to be quiet, and not provoke the Roman
army against them; but the seditious made a jest of the entreaties of
Tiberius, and reproached him for so doing.

8. Now when he perceived that those who were for innovations would not
be pacified till some great calamity should overtake them, he sent out
upon them those two Roman legions that were in the city, and together
with them five thousand other soldiers, who, by chance, were come
together out of Libya, to the ruin of the Jews. They were also permitted
not only to kill them, but to plunder them of what they had, and to set
fire to their houses. These soldiers rushed violently into that part of
the city that was called Delta, where the Jewish people lived together,
and did as they were bidden, though not without bloodshed on their own
side also; for the Jews got together, and set those that were the best
armed among them in the forefront, and made a resistance for a great
while; but when once they gave back, they were destroyed unmercifully;
and this their destruction was complete, some being caught in the open
field, and others forced into their houses, which houses were first
plundered of what was in them, and then set on fire by the Romans;
wherein no mercy was shown to the infants, and no regard had to the
aged; but they went on in the slaughter of persons of every age, till
all the place was overflowed with blood, and fifty thousand of them
lay dead upon heaps; nor had the remainder been preserved, had they not
be-taken themselves to supplication. So Alexander commiserated their
condition, and gave orders to the Romans to retire; accordingly,
these being accustomed to obey orders, left off killing at the first
intimation; but the populace of Alexandria bare so very great hatred to
the Jews, that it was difficult to recall them, and it was a hard thing
to make them leave their dead bodies.

9. And this was the miserable calamity which at this time befell the
Jews at Alexandria. Hereupon Cestius thought fit no longer to lie still,
while the Jews were everywhere up in arms; so he took out of Antioch
the twelfth legion entire, and out of each of the rest he selected two
thousand, with six cohorts of footmen, and four troops of horsemen,
besides those auxiliaries which were sent by the kings; of which
Antiochus sent two thousand horsemen, and three thousand footmen, with
as many archers; and Agrippa sent the same number of footmen, and one
thousand horsemen; Sohemus also followed with four thousand, a third
part whereof were horsemen, but most part were archers, and thus did
he march to Ptolemais. There were also great numbers of auxiliaries
gathered together from the [free] cities, who indeed had not the same
skill in martial affairs, but made up in their alacrity and in their
hatred to the Jews what they wanted in skill. There came also along with
Cestius Agrippa himself, both as a guide in his march over the country,
and a director what was fit to be done; so Cestius took part of his
forces, and marched hastily to Zabulon, a strong city of Galilee, which
was called the City of Men, and divides the country of Ptolemais from
our nation; this he found deserted by its men, the multitude having fled
to the mountains, but full of all sorts of good things; those he gave
leave to the soldiers to plunder, and set fire to the city, although it
was of admirable beauty, and had its houses built like those in Tyre,
and Sidon, and Berytus. After this he overran all the country, and
seized upon whatsoever came in his way, and set fire to the villages
that were round about them, and then returned to Ptolemais. But when the
Syrians, and especially those of Berytus, were busy in plundering,
the Jews pulled up their courage again, for they knew that Cestius was
retired, and fell upon those that were left behind unexpectedly, and
destroyed about two thousand of them. 27

10. And now Cestius himself marched from Ptolemais, and came to Cesarea;
but he sent part of his army before him to Joppa, and gave order, that
if they could take that city [by surprise] they should keep it; but that
in case the citizens should perceive they were coming to attack them,
that they then should stay for him, and for the rest of the army. So
some of them made a brisk march by the sea-side, and some by land, and
so coming upon them on both sides, they took the city with ease; and as
the inhabitants had made no provision beforehand for a flight, nor had
gotten any thing ready for fighting, the soldiers fell upon them, and
slew them all, with their families, and then plundered and burnt the
city. The number of the slain was eight thousand four hundred. In
like manner, Cestius sent also a considerable body of horsemen to the
toparchy of Narbatene, that adjoined to Cesarea, who destroyed the
country, and slew a great multitude of its people; they also plundered
what they had, and burnt their villages.

11. But Cestius sent Gallus, the commander of the twelfth legion, into
Galilee, and delivered to him as many of his forces as he supposed
sufficient to subdue that nation. He was received by the strongest city
of Galilee, which was Sepphoris, with acclamations of joy; which wise
conduct of that city occasioned the rest of the cities to be in quiet;
while the seditious part and the robbers ran away to that mountain
which lies in the very middle of Galilee, and is situated over against
Sepphoris; it is called Asamon. So Gallus brought his forces against
them; but while those men were in the superior parts above the Romans,
they easily threw their darts upon the Romans, as they made their
approaches, and slew about two hundred of them. But when the Romans had
gone round the mountains, and were gotten into the parts above their
enemies, the others were soon beaten; nor could they who had only light
armor on sustain the force of them that fought them armed all over; nor
when they were beaten could they escape the enemies' horsemen; insomuch
that only some few concealed themselves in certain places hard to be
come at, among the mountains, while the rest, above two thousand in
number, were slain.






CHAPTER 19.


     What Cestius Did Against The Jews; And How, Upon His
     Besieging Jerusalem, He Retreated From The City Without Any
     Just Occasion In The World. As Also What Severe Calamities
     He Under Went From The Jews In His Retreat.

1. And now Gallus, seeing nothing more that looked towards an innovation
in Galilee, returned with his army to Cesarea: but Cestius removed with
his whole army, and marched to Antipatris; and when he was informed that
there was a great body of Jewish forces gotten together in a certain
tower called Aphek, he sent a party before to fight them; but this party
dispersed the Jews by affrighting them before it came to a battle: so
they came, and finding their camp deserted, they burnt it, as well
as the villages that lay about it. But when Cestius had marched from
Antipatris to Lydda, he found the city empty of its men, for the whole
multitude 28 were gone up to Jerusalem to the feast of tabernacles;
yet did he destroy fifty of those that showed themselves, and burnt the
city, and so marched forwards; and ascending by Betboron, he pitched
his camp at a certain place called Gabao, fifty furlongs distant from
Jerusalem.

2. But as for the Jews, when they saw the war approaching to their
metropolis, they left the feast, and betook themselves to their arms;
and taking courage greatly from their multitude, went in a sudden and
disorderly manner to the fight, with a great noise, and without any
consideration had of the rest of the seventh day, although the Sabbath
29 was the day to which they had the greatest regard; but that rage
which made them forget the religious observation [of the sabbath]
made them too hard for their enemies in the fight: with such violence
therefore did they fall upon the Romans, as to break into their ranks,
and to march through the midst of them, making a great slaughter as they
went, insomuch that unless the horsemen, and such part of the footmen as
were not yet tired in the action, had wheeled round, and succored that
part of the army which was not yet broken, Cestius, with his whole army,
had been in danger: however, five hundred and fifteen of the Romans were
slain, of which number four hundred were footmen, and the rest horsemen,
while the Jews lost only twenty-two, of whom the most valiant were the
kinsmen of Monobazus, king of Adiabene, and their names were Monobazus
and Kenedeus; and next to them were Niger of Perea, and Silas of
Babylon, who had deserted from king Agrippa to the Jews; for he had
formerly served in his army. When the front of the Jewish army had been
cut off, the Jews retired into the city; but still Simon, the son of
Giora, fell upon the backs of the Romans, as they were ascending up
Bethoron, and put the hindmost of the army into disorder, and carried
off many of the beasts that carried the weapons of war, and led Shem
into the city. But as Cestius tarried there three days, the Jews seized
upon the elevated parts of the city, and set watches at the entrances
into the city, and appeared openly resolved not to rest when once the
Romans should begin to march.

3. And now when Agrippa observed that even the affairs of the Romans
were likely to be in danger, while such an immense multitude of their
enemies had seized upon the mountains round about, he determined to try
what the Jews would agree to by words, as thinking that he should either
persuade them all to desist from fighting, or, however, that he should
cause the sober part of them to separate themselves from the opposite
party. So he sent Borceus and Phebus, the persons of his party that were
the best known to them, and promised them that Cestius should give them
his right hand, to secure them of the Romans' entire forgiveness of what
they had done amiss, if they would throw away their arms, and come over
to them; but the seditious, fearing lest the whole multitude, in
hopes of security to themselves, should go over to Agrippa, resolved
immediately to fall upon and kill the ambassadors; accordingly they
slew Phebus before he said a word, but Borceus was only wounded, and so
prevented his fate by flying away. And when the people were very angry
at this, they had the seditious beaten with stones and clubs, and drove
them before them into the city.

4. But now Cestius, observing that the disturbances that were begun
among the Jews afforded him a proper opportunity to attack them, took
his whole army along with him, and put the Jews to flight, and pursued
them to Jerusalem. He then pitched his camp upon the elevation called
Scopus, [or watch-tower,] which was distant seven furlongs from
the city; yet did not he assault them in three days' time, out of
expectation that those within might perhaps yield a little; and in the
mean time he sent out a great many of his soldiers into neighboring
villages, to seize upon their corn. And on the fourth day, which was the
thirtieth of the month Hyperbereteus, [Tisri,] when he had put his army
in array, he brought it into the city. Now for the people, they were
kept under by the seditious; but the seditious themselves were greatly
affrighted at the good order of the Romans, and retired from the
suburbs, and retreated into the inner part of the city, and into the
temple. But when Cestius was come into the city, he set the part called
Bezetha, which is called Cenopolis, [or the new city,] on fire; as he
did also to the timber market; after which he came into the upper city,
and pitched his camp over against the royal palace; and had he but at
this very time attempted to get within the walls by force, he had won
the city presently, and the war had been put an end to at once; but
Tyrannius Priseus, the muster-master of the army, and a great number of
the officers of the horse, had been corrupted by Florus, and diverted
him from that his attempt; and that was the occasion that this war
lasted so very long, and thereby the Jews were involved in such
incurable calamities.

5. In the mean time, many of the principal men of the city were
persuaded by Ananus, the son of Jonathan, and invited Cestius into the
city, and were about to open the gates for him; but he overlooked this
offer, partly out of his anger at the Jews, and partly because he did
not thoroughly believe they were in earnest; whence it was that he
delayed the matter so long, that the seditious perceived the treachery,
and threw Ananus and those of his party down from the wall, and,
pelting them with stones, drove them into their houses; but they stood
themselves at proper distances in the towers, and threw their darts at
those that were getting over the wall. Thus did the Romans make their
attack against the wall for five days, but to no purpose. But on the
next day Cestius took a great many of his choicest men, and with them
the archers, and attempted to break into the temple at the northern
quarter of it; but the Jews beat them off from the cloisters, and
repulsed them several times when they were gotten near to the wall, till
at length the multitude of the darts cut them off, and made them retire;
but the first rank of the Romans rested their shields upon the wall,
and so did those that were behind them, and the like did those that were
still more backward, and guarded themselves with what they call Testudo,
[the back of] a tortoise, upon which the darts that were thrown fell,
and slided off without doing them any harm; so the soldiers undermined
the wall, without being themselves hurt, and got all things ready for
setting fire to the gate of the temple.

6. And now it was that a horrible fear seized upon the seditious,
insomuch that many of them ran out of the city, as though it were to be
taken immediately; but the people upon this took courage, and where the
wicked part of the city gave ground, thither did they come, in order to
set open the gates, and to admit Cestius 30 as their benefactor, who,
had he but continued the siege a little longer, had certainly taken the
city; but it was, I suppose, owing to the aversion God had already at
the city and the sanctuary, that he was hindered from putting an end to
the war that very day.

7. It then happened that Cestius was not conscious either how the
besieged despaired of success, nor how courageous the people were for
him; and so he recalled his soldiers from the place, and by despairing
of any expectation of taking it, without having received any disgrace,
he retired from the city, without any reason in the world. But when the
robbers perceived this unexpected retreat of his, they resumed their
courage, and ran after the hinder parts of his army, and destroyed a
considerable number of both their horsemen and footmen; and now Cestius
lay all night at the camp which was at Scopus; and as he went off
farther next day, he thereby invited the enemy to follow him, who still
fell upon the hindmost, and destroyed them; they also fell upon the
flank on each side of the army, and threw darts upon them obliquely,
nor durst those that were hindmost turn back upon those who wounded them
behind, as imagining that the multitude of those that pursued them was
immense; nor did they venture to drive away those that pressed upon them
on each side, because they were heavy with their arms, and were afraid
of breaking their ranks to pieces, and because they saw the Jews were
light, and ready for making incursions upon them. And this was the
reason why the Romans suffered greatly, without being able to revenge
themselves upon their enemies; so they were galled all the way, and
their ranks were put into disorder, and those that were thus put out of
their ranks were slain; among whom were Priscus, the commander of the
sixth legion, and Longinus, the tribune, and Emilius Secundus, the
commander of a troop of horsemen. So it was not without difficulty that
they got to Gabao, their former camp, and that not without the loss of
a great part of their baggage. There it was that Cestius staid two
days, and was in great distress to know what he should do in these
circumstances; but when on the third day he saw a still much greater
number of enemies, and all the parts round about him full of Jews, he
understood that his delay was to his own detriment, and that if he staid
any longer there, he should have still more enemies upon him.

8. That therefore he might fly the faster, he gave orders to cast away
what might hinder his army's march; so they killed the mules and other
creatures, excepting those that carried their darts and machines, which
they retained for their own use, and this principally because they were
afraid lest the Jews should seize upon them. He then made his army march
on as far as Bethoron. Now the Jews did not so much press upon them when
they were in large open places; but when they were penned up in their
descent through narrow passages, then did some of them get before, and
hindered them from getting out of them; and others of them thrust the
hinder-most down into the lower places; and the whole multitude extended
themselves over against the neck of the passage, and covered the Roman
army with their darts. In which circumstances, as the footmen knew not
how to defend themselves, so the danger pressed the horsemen still more,
for they were so pelted, that they could not march along the road in
their ranks, and the ascents were so high, that the cavalry were not
able to march against the enemy; the precipices also and valleys into
which they frequently fell, and tumbled down, were such on each side of
them, that there was neither place for their flight, nor any contrivance
could be thought of for their defense; till the distress they were at
last in was so great, that they betook themselves to lamentations, and
to such mournful cries as men use in the utmost despair: the joyful
acclamations of the Jews also, as they encouraged one another, echoed
the sounds back again, these last composing a noise of those that at
once rejoiced and were in a rage. Indeed, things were come to such a
pass, that the Jews had almost taken Cestius's entire army prisoners,
had not the night come on, when the Romans fled to Bethoron, and the
Jews seized upon all the places round about them, and watched for their
coming out [in the morning].

9. And then it was that Cestius, despairing of obtaining room for a
public march, contrived how he might best run away; and when he had
selected four hundred of the most courageous of his soldiers, he placed
them at the strongest of their fortifications, and gave order, that when
they went up to the morning guard, they should erect their ensigns, that
the Jews might be made to believe that the entire army was there still,
while he himself took the rest of his forces with him, and marched,
without any noise, thirty furlongs. But when the Jews perceived, in the
morning, that the camp was empty, they ran upon those four hundred who
had deluded them, and immediately threw their darts at them, and slew
them; and then pursued after Cestius. But he had already made use of a
great part of the night in his flight, and still marched quicker when it
was day; insomuch that the soldiers, through the astonishment and
fear they were in, left behind them their engines for sieges, and for
throwing of stones, and a great part of the instruments of war. So the
Jews went on pursuing the Romans as far as Antipatris; after which,
seeing they could not overtake them, they came back, and took the
engines, and spoiled the dead bodies, and gathered the prey together
which the Romans had left behind them, and came back running and singing
to their metropolis; while they had themselves lost a few only, but had
slain of the Romans five thousand and three hundred footmen, and three
hundred and eighty horsemen. This defeat happened on the eighth day of
the month Dius, [Marchesvan,] in the twelfth year of the reign of Nero.






CHAPTER 20.


     Cestius Sends Ambassadors To Nero. The People Of Damascus
     Slay Those Jews That Lived With Them. The People Of
     Jerusalem After They Had [Left Off] Pursuing Cestius, Return
     To The City And Get Things Ready For Its Defense And Make A
     Great Many Generals For Their Armies And Particularly
     Josephus The Writer Of These Books. Some Account Of His
     Administration.

1. After this calamity had befallen Cestius, many of the most eminent
of the Jews swam away from the city, as from a ship when it was going to
sink; Costobarus, therefore, and Saul, who were brethren, together with
Philip, the son of Jacimus, who was the commander of king Agrippa's
forces, ran away from the city, and went to Cestius. But then how
Antipas, who had been besieged with them in the king's palace, but would
not fly away with them, was afterward slain by the seditious, we shall
relate hereafter. However, Cestius sent Saul and his friends, at their
own desire, to Achaia, to Nero, to inform him of the great distress they
were in, and to lay the blame of their kindling the war upon Florus, as
hoping to alleviate his own danger, by provoking his indignation against
Florus.

2. In the mean time, the people of Damascus, when they were informed
of the destruction of the Romans, set about the slaughter of those Jews
that were among them; and as they had them already cooped up together in
the place of public exercises, which they had done out of the suspicion
they had of them, they thought they should meet with no difficulty in
the attempt; yet did they distrust their own wives, which were almost
all of them addicted to the Jewish religion; on which account it was
that their greatest concern was, how they might conceal these things
from them; so they came upon the Jews, and cut their throats, as being
in a narrow place, in number ten thousand, and all of them unarmed, and
this in one hour's time, without any body to disturb them.

3. But as to those who had pursued after Cestius, when they were
returned back to Jerusalem, they overbore some of those that favored
the Romans by violence, and some them persuaded [by en-treaties] to
join with them, and got together in great numbers in the temple, and
appointed a great many generals for the war. Joseph also, the son of
Gorion, 31 and Ananus the high priest, were chosen as governors of all
affairs within the city, and with a particular charge to repair the
walls of the city; for they did not ordain Eleazar the son of Simon to
that office, although he had gotten into his possession the prey they
had taken from the Romans, and the money they had taken from Cestius,
together with a great part of the public treasures, because they saw
he was of a tyrannical temper, and that his followers were, in their
behavior, like guards about him. However, the want they were in of
Eleazar's money, and the subtle tricks used by him, brought all so
about, that the people were circumvented, and submitted themselves to
his authority in all public affairs.

4. They also chose other generals for Idumea; Jesus, the son of
Sapphias, one of the high priests; and Eleazar, the son of Ananias, the
high priest; they also enjoined Niger, the then governor of Idumea,
32 who was of a family that belonged to Perea, beyond Jordan, and
was thence called the Peraite, that he should be obedient to those
fore-named commanders. Nor did they neglect the care of other parts of
the country; but Joseph the son of Simon was sent as general to Jericho,
as was Manasseh to Perea, and John, the Esscue, to the toparchy of
Thamna; Lydda was also added to his portion, and Joppa, and Emmaus.
But John, the son of Matthias, was made governor of the toparchies of
Gophnitica and Acrabattene; as was Josephus, the son of Matthias, of
both the Galilees. Gamala also, which was the strongest city in those
parts, was put under his command.

5. So every one of the other commanders administered the affairs of his
portion with that alacrity and prudence they were masters of; but as
to Josephus, when he came into Galilee, his first care was to gain the
good-will of the people of that country, as sensible that he should
thereby have in general good success, although he should fail in other
points. And being conscious to himself that if he communicated part of
his power to the great men, he should make them his fast friends; and
that he should gain the same favor from the multitude, if he executed
his commands by persons of their own country, and with whom they were
well acquainted; he chose out seventy of the most prudent men, and those
elders in age, and appointed them to be rulers of all Galilee, as he
chose seven judges in every city to hear the lesser quarrels; for as to
the greater causes, and those wherein life and death were concerned, he
enjoined they should be brought to him and the seventy 33 elders.

6. Josephus also, when he had settled these rules for determining causes
by the law, with regard to the people's dealings one with another,
betook himself to make provisions for their safety against external
violence; and as he knew the Romans would fall upon Galilee, he built
walls in proper places about Jotapata, and Bersabee, and Selamis; and
besides these, about Caphareccho, and Japha, and Sigo, and what they
call Mount Tabor, and Taricheae, and Tiberias. Moreover, he built walls
about the caves near the lake of Gennesar, which places lay in the Lower
Galilee; the same he did to the places of Upper Galilee, as well as to
the rock called the Rock of the Achabari, and to Seph, and Jamnith, and
Meroth; and in Gaulonitis he fortified Seleucia, and Sogane, and Gamala;
but as to those of Sepphoris, they were the only people to whom he gave
leave to build their own walls, and this because he perceived they were
rich and wealthy, and ready to go to war, without standing in need of
any injunctions for that purpose. The case was the same with Gischala,
which had a wall built about it by John the son of Levi himself, but
with the consent of Josephus; but for the building of the rest of the
fortresses, he labored together with all the other builders, and was
present to give all the necessary orders for that purpose. He also got
together an army out of Galilee, of more than a hundred thousand young
men, all of which he armed with the old weapons which he had collected
together and prepared for them.

7. And when he had considered that the Roman power became invincible,
chiefly by their readiness in obeying orders, and the constant exercise
of their arms, he despaired of teaching these his men the use of their
arms, which was to be obtained by experience; but observing that
their readiness in obeying orders was owing to the multitude of their
officers, he made his partitions in his army more after the Roman
manner, and appointed a great many subalterns. He also distributed the
soldiers into various classes, whom he put under captains of tens, and
captains of hundreds, and then under captains of thousands; and besides
these, he had commanders of larger bodies of men. He also taught them to
give the signals one to another, and to call and recall the soldiers by
the trumpets, how to expand the wings of an army, and make them wheel
about; and when one wing hath had success, to turn again and assist
those that were hard set, and to join in the defense of what had most
suffered. He also continually instructed them in what concerned the
courage of the soul, and the hardiness of the body; and, above all, he
exercised them for war, by declaring to them distinctly the good order
of the Romans, and that they were to fight with men who, both by the
strength of their bodies and courage of their souls, had conquered in a
manner the whole habitable earth. He told them that he should make trial
of the good order they would observe in war, even before it came to any
battle, in case they would abstain from the crimes they used to
indulge themselves in, such as theft, and robbery, and rapine, and from
defrauding their own countrymen, and never to esteem the harm done
to those that were so near of kin to them to be any advantage to
themselves; for that wars are then managed the best when the warriors
preserve a good conscience; but that such as are ill men in private life
will not only have those for enemies which attack them, but God himself
also for their antagonist.

8. And thus did he continue to admonish them. Now he chose for the war
such an army as was sufficient, i.e. sixty thousand footmen, and two
hundred and fifty horsemen; 34 and besides these, on which he put the
greatest trust, there were about four thousand five hundred mercenaries;
he had also six hundred men as guards of his body. Now the cities easily
maintained the rest of his army, excepting the mercenaries, for every
one of the cities enumerated above sent out half their men to the army,
and retained the other half at home, in order to get provisions for
them; insomuch that the one part went to the war, and the other part to
their work, and so those that sent out their corn were paid for it by
those that were in arms, by that security which they enjoyed from them.






CHAPTER 21.


     Concerning John Of Gichala. Josephus Uses Stratagems Against
     The Plots John Laid Against Him And Recovers Certain Cities
     Which Had Revolted From Him.

1. Now as Josephus was thus engaged in the administration of the affairs
of Galilee, there arose a treacherous person, a man of Gischala, the son
of Levi, whose name was John. His character was that of a very cunning
and very knavish person, beyond the ordinary rate of the other men
of eminence there, and for wicked practices he had not his fellow
any where. Poor he was at first, and for a long time his wants were a
hinderance to him in his wicked designs. He was a ready liar, and yet
very sharp in gaining credit to his fictions: he thought it a point of
virtue to delude people, and would delude even such as were the dearest
to him. He was a hypocritical pretender to humanity, but where he had
hopes of gain, he spared not the shedding of blood: his desires were
ever carried to great things, and he encouraged his hopes from those
mean wicked tricks which he was the author of. He had a peculiar knack
at thieving; but in some time he got certain companions in his impudent
practices; at first they were but few, but as he proceeded on in his
evil course, they became still more and more numerous. He took care that
none of his partners should be easily caught in their rogueries, but
chose such out of the rest as had the strongest constitutions of body,
and the greatest courage of soul, together with great skill in martial
affairs; as he got together a band of four hundred men, who came
principally out of the country of Tyre, and were vagabonds that had
run away from its villages; and by the means of these he laid waste
all Galilee, and irritated a considerable number, who were in great
expectation of a war then suddenly to arise among them.

2. However, John's want of money had hitherto restrained him in his
ambition after command, and in his attempts to advance himself. But when
he saw that Josephus was highly pleased with the activity of his temper,
he persuaded him, in the first place, to intrust him with the repairing
of the walls of his native city, [Gischala,] in which work he got a
great deal of money from the rich citizens. He after that contrived a
very shrewd trick, and pretending that the Jews who dwelt in Syria were
obliged to make use of oil that was made by others than those of their
own nation, he desired leave of Josephus to send oil to their borders;
so he bought four amphorae with such Tyrian money as was of the value of
four Attic drachmae, and sold every half-amphora at the same price. And
as Galilee was very fruitful in oil, and was peculiarly so at that time,
by sending away great quantities, and having the sole privilege so
to do, he gathered an immense sum of money together, which money he
immediately used to the disadvantage of him who gave him that privilege;
and, as he supposed, that if he could once overthrow Josephus, he should
himself obtain the government of Galilee; so he gave orders to the
robbers that were under his command to be more zealous in their thievish
expeditions, that by the rise of many that desired innovations in the
country, he might either catch their general in his snares, as he came
to the country's assistance, and then kill him; or if he should overlook
the robbers, he might accuse him for his negligence to the people of the
country. He also spread abroad a report far and near that Josephus was
delivering up the administration of affairs to the Romans; and many such
plots did he lay, in order to ruin him.

3. Now at the same time that certain young men of the village Dabaritta,
who kept guard in the Great Plain laid snares for Ptolemy, who was
Agrippa's and Bernice's steward, and took from him all that he had with
him; among which things there were a great many costly garments, and no
small number of silver cups, and six hundred pieces of gold; yet were
they not able to conceal what they had stolen, but brought it all to
Josephus, to Taricheae. Hereupon he blamed them for the violence they
had offered to the king and queen, and deposited what they brought to
him with Eneas, the most potent man of Taricheae, with an intention of
sending the things back to the owners at a proper time; which act of
Josephus brought him into the greatest danger; for those that had stolen
the things had an indignation at him, both because they gained no share
of it for themselves, and because they perceived beforehand what was
Josephus's intention, and that he would freely deliver up what had cost
them so much pains to the king and queen. These ran away by night to
their several villages, and declared to all men that Josephus was going
to betray them: they also raised great disorders in all the neighboring
cities, insomuch that in the morning a hundred thousand armed men came
running together; which multitude was crowded together in the hippodrome
at Taricheae, and made a very peevish clamor against him; while some
cried out, that they should depose the traitor; and others, that they
should burn him. Now John irritated a great many, as did also one Jesus,
the son of Sapphias, who was then governor of Tiberias. Then it was that
Josephus's friends, and the guards of his body, were so affrighted at
this violent assault of the multitude, that they all fled away but four;
and as he was asleep, they awaked him, as the people were going to
set fire to the house. And although those four that remained with him
persuaded him to run away, he was neither surprised at his being himself
deserted, nor at the great multitude that came against him, but leaped
out to them with his clothes rent, and ashes sprinkled on his head, with
his hands behind him, and his sword hanging at his neck. At this sight
his friends, especially those of Taricheae, commiserated his condition;
but those that came out of the country, and those in their neighborhood,
to whom his government seemed burdensome, reproached him, and bid him
produce the money which belonged to them all immediately, and to confess
the agreement he had made to betray them; for they imagined, from the
habit in which he appeared, that he would deny nothing of what they
suspected concerning him, and that it was in order to obtain pardon that
he had put himself entirely into so pitiable a posture. But this humble
appearance was only designed as preparatory to a stratagem of his, who
thereby contrived to set those that were so angry at him at variance one
with another about the things they were angry at. However, he promised
he would confess all: hereupon he was permitted to speak, when he said,
"I did neither intend to send this money back to Agrippa, nor to gain it
myself; for I did never esteem one that was your enemy to be my friend,
nor did I look upon what would tend to your disadvantage to be my
advantage. But, O you people of Tarieheae, I saw that your city stood in
more need than others of fortifications for your security, and that it
wanted money in order for the building it a wall. I was also afraid lest
the people of Tiberias and other cities should lay a plot to seize upon
these spoils, and therefore it was that I intended to retain this money
privately, that I might encompass you with a wall. But if this does not
please you, I will produce what was brought me, and leave it to you to
plunder it; but if I have conducted myself so well as to please you, you
may if you please punish your benefactor."

4. Hereupon the people of Taricheae loudly commended him; but those
of Tiberias, with the rest of the company, gave him hard names, and
threatened what they would do to him; so both sides left off quarrelling
with Josephus, and fell on quarrelling with one another. So he grew
bold upon the dependence he had on his friends, which were the people of
Taricheae, and about forty thousand in number, and spake more freely to
the whole multitude, and reproached them greatly for their rashness; and
told them, that with this money he would build walls about Taricheae,
and would put the other cities in a state of security also; for that
they should not want money, if they would but agree for whose benefit
it was to be procured, and would not suffer themselves to be irritated
against him who procured it for them.

5. Hereupon the rest of the multitude that had been deluded retired;
but yet so that they went away angry, and two thousand of them made an
assault upon him in their armor; and as he was already gone to his own
house, they stood without and threatened him. On which occasion Josephus
again used a second stratagem to escape them; for he got upon the top of
his house, and with his right hand desired them to be silent, and said
to them, "I cannot tell what you would have, nor can hear what you say,
for the confused noise you make;" but he said that he would comply with
all their demands, in case they would but send some of their number
in to him that might talk with him about it. And when the principal of
them, with their leaders, heard this, they came into the house. He then
drew them to the most retired part of the house, and shut the door of
that hall where he put them, and then had them whipped till every one of
their inward parts appeared naked. In the mean time the multitude stood
round the house, and supposed that he had a long discourse with those
that were gone in about what they claimed of him. He had then the doors
set open immediately, and sent the men out all bloody, which so terribly
affrighted those that had before threatened him, that they threw away
their arms and ran away.

6. But as for John, his envy grew greater [upon this escape of
Josephus], and he framed a new plot against him; he pretended to be
sick, and by a letter desired that Josephus would give him leave to use
the hot baths that were at Tiberias, for the recovery of his health.
Hereupon Josephus, who hitherto suspected nothing of John's plots
against him, wrote to the governors of the city, that they would provide
a lodging and necessaries for John; which favors, when he had made use
of, in two days' time he did what he came about; some he corrupted with
delusive frauds, and others with money, and so persuaded them to revolt
from Josephus. This Silas, who was appointed guardian of the city by
Josephus, wrote to him immediately, and informed him of the plot against
him; which epistle when Josephus had received, he marched with great
diligence all night, and came early in the morning to Tiberias; at which
time the rest of the multitude met him. But John, who suspected that his
coming was not for his advantage, sent however one of his friends, and
pretended that he was sick, and that being confined to his bed, he could
not come to pay him his respects. But as soon as Josephus had got the
people of Tiberias together in the stadium, and tried to discourse with
them about the letters that he had received, John privately sent some
armed men, and gave them orders to slay him. But when the people saw
that the armed men were about to draw their swords, they cried out; at
which cry Josephus turned himself about, and when he saw that the
swords were just at his throat, he marched away in great haste to the
sea-shore, and left off that speech which he was going to make to the
people, upon an elevation of six cubits high. He then seized on a ship
which lay in the haven, and leaped into it, with two of his guards, and
fled away into the midst of the lake.

7. But now the soldiers he had with him took up their arms immediately,
and marched against the plotters; but Josephus was afraid lest a civil
war should be raised by the envy of a few men, and bring the city to
ruin; so he sent some of his party to tell them, that they should do no
more than provide for their own safety; that they should not kill any
body, nor accuse any for the occasion they had afforded [of disorder].
Accordingly, these men obeyed his orders, and were quiet; but the people
of the neighboring country, when they were informed of this plot, and of
the plotter, they got together in great multitudes to oppose John. But
he prevented their attempt, and fled away to Gischala, his native
city, while the Galileans came running out of their several cities to
Josephus; and as they were now become many ten thousands of armed men,
they cried out, that they were come against John the common plotter
against their interest, and would at the same time burn him, and that
city which had received him. Hereupon Josephus told them that he took
their good-will to him kindly, but still he restrained their fury,
and intended to subdue his enemies by prudent conduct, rather than by
slaying them; so he excepted those of every city which had joined in
this revolt with John, by name, who had readily been shown him by these
that came from every city, and caused public proclamation to be made,
that he would seize upon the effects of those that did not forsake
John within five days' time, and would burn both their houses and their
families with fire. Whereupon three thousand of John's party left him
immediately, who came to Josephus, and threw their arms down at his
feet. John then betook himself, together with his two thousand Syrian
runagates, from open attempts, to more secret ways of treachery.
Accordingly, he privately sent messengers to Jerusalem, to accuse
Josephus, as having to great power, and to let them know that he would
soon come as a tyrant to their metropolis, unless they prevented him.
This accusation the people were aware of beforehand, but had no regard
to it. However, some of the grandees, out of envy, and some of the
rulers also, sent money to John privately, that he might be able to get
together mercenary soldiers, in order to fight Josephus; they also made
a decree of themselves, and this for recalling him from his government,
yet did they not think that decree sufficient; so they sent withal two
thousand five hundred armed men, and four persons of the highest rank
amongst them; Joazar the son of Nomicus, and Ananias the son of Sadduk,
as also Simon and Judas the sons of Jonathan, all very able men in
speaking, that these persons might withdraw the good-will of the people
from Josephus. These had it in charge, that if he would voluntarily
come away, they should permit him to [come and] give an account of
his conduct; but if he obstinately insisted upon continuing in his
government, they should treat him as an enemy. Now Josephus's friends
had sent him word that an army was coming against him, but they gave
him no notice beforehand what the reason of their coming was, that being
only known among some secret councils of his enemies; and by this means
it was that four cities revolted from him immediately, Sepphoris, and
Gamala, and Gischala, and Tiberias. Yet did he recover these cities
without war; and when he had routed those four commanders by stratagems,
and had taken the most potent of their warriors, he sent them to
Jerusalem; and the people [of Galilee] had great indignation at them,
and were in a zealous disposition to slay, not only these forces, but
those that sent them also, had not these forces prevented it by running
away.

8. Now John was detained afterward within the walls of Gischala, by
the fear he was in of Josephus; but within a few days Tiberias revolted
again, the people within it inviting king Agrippa [to return to the
exercise of his authority there]. And when he did not come at the
time appointed, and when a few Roman horsemen appeared that day,
they expelled Josephus out of the city. Now this revolt of theirs was
presently known at Taricheae; and as Josephus had sent out all the
soldiers that were with him to gather corn, he knew not how either to
march out alone against the revolters, or to stay where he was, because
he was afraid the king's soldiers might prevent him if he tarried, and
might get into the city; for he did not intend to do any thing on
the next day, because it was the sabbath day, and would hinder his
proceeding. So he contrived to circumvent the revolters by a stratagem;
and in the first place he ordered the gates of Taricheae to be shut,
that nobody might go out and inform [those of Tiberias], for whom it
was intended, what stratagem he was about; he then got together all the
ships that were upon the lake, which were found to be two hundred and
thirty, and in each of them he put no more than four mariners. So he
sailed to Tiberias with haste, and kept at such a distance from the
city, that it was not easy for the people to see the vessels, and
ordered that the empty vessels should float up and down there, while
himself, who had but seven of his guards with him, and those unarmed
also, went so near as to be seen; but when his adversaries, who were
still reproaching him, saw him from the walls, they were so astonished
that they supposed all the ships were full of armed men, and threw down
their arms, and by signals of intercession they besought him to spare
the city.

9. Upon this Josephus threatened them terribly, and reproached them,
that when they were the first that took up arms against the Romans, they
should spend their force beforehand in civil dissensions, and do what
their enemies desired above all things; and that besides they should
endeavor so hastily to seize upon him, who took care of their safety,
and had not been ashamed to shut the gates of their city against
him that built their walls; that, however, he would admit of any
intercessors from them that might make some excuse for them, and with
whom he would make such agreements as might be for the city's security.
Hereupon ten of the most potent men of Tiberias came down to him
presently; and when he had taken them into one of his vessels, he
ordered them to be carried a great way off from the city. He then
commanded that fifty others of their senate, such as were men of the
greatest eminence, should come to him, that they also might give him
some security on their behalf. After which, under one new pretense or
another, he called forth others, one after another, to make the leagues
between them. He then gave order to the masters of those vessels which
he had thus filled to sail away immediately for Taricheae, and to
confine those men in the prison there; till at length he took all their
senate, consisting of six hundred persons, and about two thousand of the
populace, and carried them away to Taricheae. 35

10. And when the rest of the people cried out, that it was one Clitus
that was the chief author of this revolt, they desired him to spend
his anger upon him [only]; but Josephus, whose intention it was to slay
nobody, commanded one Levius, belonging to his guards, to go out of the
vessel, in order to cut off both Clitus's hands; yet was Levius afraid
to go out by himself alone to such a large body of enemies, and refused
to go. Now Clitus saw that Josephus was in a great passion in the ship,
and ready to leap out of it, in order to execute the punishment himself;
he begged therefore from the shore, that he would leave him one of his
hands; which Josephus agreed to, upon condition that he would himself
cutoff the other hand; accordingly he drew his sword, and with his
right hand cut off his left, so great was the fear he was in of
Josephus himself. And thus he took the people of Tiberias prisoners,
and recovered the city again with empty ships and seven of his guard.
Moreover, a few days afterward he retook Gischala, which had revolted
with the people of Sepphoris, and gave his soldiers leave to plunder
it; yet did he get all the plunder together, and restored it to the
inhabitants; and the like he did to the inhabitants of Sepphoris and
Tiberias. For when he had subdued those cities, he had a mind, by
letting them be plundered, to give them some good instruction, while at
the same time he regained their good-will by restoring them their money
again.






CHAPTER 22.


     The Jews Make All Ready For The War; And Simon, The Son Of
     Gioras, Falls To Plundering.

1. And thus were the disturbances of Galilee quieted, when, upon their
ceasing to prosecute their civil dissensions, they betook themselves to
make preparations for the war with the Romans. Now in Jerusalem the
high priest Artanus, and as many of the men of power as were not in the
interest of the Romans, both repaired the walls, and made a great many
warlike instruments, insomuch that in all parts of the city darts and
all sorts of armor were upon the anvil. Although the multitude of the
young men were engaged in exercises, without any regularity, and all
places were full of tumultuous doings; yet the moderate sort were
exceedingly sad; and a great many there were who, out of the prospect
they had of the calamities that were coming upon them, made great
lamentations. There were also such omens observed as were understood to
be forerunners of evils by such as loved peace, but were by those that
kindled the war interpreted so as to suit their own inclinations; and
the very state of the city, even before the Romans came against it, was
that of a place doomed to destruction. However, Ananus's concern was
this, to lay aside, for a while, the preparations for the war, and to
persuade the seditious to consult their own interest, and to restrain
the madness of those that had the name of zealots; but their violence
was too hard for him; and what end he came to we shall relate hereafter.

2. But as for the Acrabbene toparchy, Simon, the son of Gioras, got a
great number of those that were fond of innovations together, and betook
himself to ravage the country; nor did he only harass the rich men's
houses, but tormented their bodies, and appeared openly and beforehand
to affect tyranny in his government. And when an army was sent against
him by Artanus, and the other rulers, he and his band retired to the
robbers that were at Masada, and staid there, and plundered the country
of Idumea with them, till both Ananus and his other adversaries were
slain; and until the rulers of that country were so afflicted with the
multitude of those that were slain, and with the continual ravage of
what they had, that they raised an army, and put garrisons into the
villages, to secure them from those insults. And in this state were the
affairs of Judea at that time.

WAR BOOK 2 FOOTNOTES

1 (return) [ Hear Dean Aldrich's note on this place: "The law or Custom
of the Jews [says he] requires seven days' mourning for the dead,"
Antiq. B. XVII. ch. 8. sect. 4; whence the author of the Book of
Ecclesiasticus, ch. 22:12, assigns seven days as the proper time of
mourning for the dead, and, ch. 38:17, enjoins men to mourn for the
dead, that they may not be evil spoken of; for, as Josephus says
presently, if any one omits this mourning [funeral feast], he is not
esteemed a holy person. How it is certain that such a seven days'
mourning has been customary from times of the greatest antiquity,
Genesis 1:10. Funeral feasts are also mentioned as of considerable
antiquity, Ezekiel 24:17; Jeremiah 16:7; Prey. 31:6; Deuteronomy 26:14;
Josephus, Of the War B. III. ch. 9. sect. 5.]


2 (return) [ This holding a council in the temple of Apollo, in the
emperor's palace at Rome, by Augustus, and even the building of this
temple magnificently by himself in that palace, are exactly agreeable
to Augustus, in his elder years, as Aldrich and from Suttonius and
Propertius.]


3 (return) [ Here we have a strong confirmation that it was Xerxes, and
not Artaxerxes, under whom the main part of the Jews returned out of the
Babylonian captivity, i.e. in the days of Ezra and Nehemiah. The same
thing is in the Antiquities, B. XI. ch.6]


4 (return) [ This practice of the Essens, in refusing to swear,
and esteeming swearing in ordinary occasions worse than perjury, is
delivered here in general words, as are the parallel injunctions of our
Savior, Matthew 6:34; 23:16; and of St. James, 5:12; but all admit of
particular exceptions for solemn causes, and on great and necessary
occasions. Thus these very Essens, who here do so zealously avoid
swearing, are related, in the very next section, to admit none till they
take tremendous oaths to perform their several duties to God, and to
their neighbor, without supposing they thereby break this rule, Not to
swear at all. The case is the same in Christianity, as we learn from the
Apostolical Constitutions, which although they agree with Christ and St.
James, in forbidding to swear in general, ch. 5:12; 6:2, 3; yet do they
explain it elsewhere, by avoiding to swear falsely, and to swear often
and in vain, ch. 2:36; and again, by "not swearing at all," but withal
adding, that "if that cannot be avoided, to swear truly," ch. 7:3; which
abundantly explain to us the nature of the measures of this general
injunction.]


5 (return) [ This mention of the "names of angels," so particularly
preserved by the Essens, [if it means more than those "messengers" which
were employed to bring, them the peculiar books of their Sect,] looks
like a prelude to that "worshipping of angels," blamed by St. Paul, as
superstitious and unlawful, in some such sort of people as these Essens
were, Colossians 2:8; as is the prayer to or towards the sun for his
rising every morning, mentioned before, sect. 5, very like those not
much later observances made mention of in the preaching of Peter,
Authent. Rec. Part II. p. 669, and regarding a kind of worship of
angels, of the month, and of the moon, and not celebrating the new
moons, or other festivals, unless the moon appeared. Which, indeed,
seems to me the earliest mention of any regard to the phases in fixing
the Jewish calendar, of which the Talmud and later Rabbins talk so much,
and upon so very little ancient foundation.]


6 (return) [ Of these Jewish or Essene [and indeed Christian] doctrines
concerning souls, both good and bad, in Hades, see that excellent
discourse, or homily, of our Josephus concerning Hades, at the end of
the volume.]


7 (return) [ Dean Aldrich reckons up three examples of this gift of
prophecy in several of these Essens out of Josephus himself, viz. in the
History of the War, B. I. ch. 3. sect. 5, Judas foretold the death of
Antigonus at Strato's Tower; B. II. ch. 7. sect. 3, Simon foretold that
Archelaus should reign but nine or ten years; and Antiq. B. XV. ch. 10.
sect. 4, 5, Menuhem foretold that Herod should be king, and should reign
tyrannically, and that for more than twenty or even thirty years. All
which came to pass accordingly.]


8 (return) [ There is so much more here about the Essens than is cited
from Josephus in Porphyry and Eusebius, and yet so much less about
the Pharisees and Sadducees, the two other Jewish sects, than would
naturally be expected in proportion to the Essens or third sect, nay,
than seems to be referred to by himself elsewhere, that one is tempted
to suppose Josephus had at first written less of the one, and more of
the two others, than his present copies afford us; as also, that, by
some unknown accident, our present copies are here made up of the larger
edition in the first case, and of the smaller in the second. See the
note in Havercamp's edition. However, what Josephus says in the name of
the Pharisees, that only the souls of good men go out of one body into
another, although all souls be immortal, and still the souls of the
bad are liable to eternal punishment; as also what he says afterwards,
Antiq. B. XVIII. ch. 1. sect. 3, that the soul's vigor is immortal, and
that under the earth they receive rewards or punishments according as
their lives have been virtuous or vicious in the present world; that to
the bad is allotted an eternal prison, but that the good are permitted
to live again in this world; are nearly agreeable to the doctrines of
Christianity. Only Josephus's rejection of the return of the wicked into
other bodies, or into this world, which he grants to the good, looks
somewhat like a contradiction to St. Paul's account of the doctrine
of the Jews, that they "themselves allowed that there should be a
resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust," Acts 24:15. Yet
because Josephus's account is that of the Pharisees, and St. Patti's
that of the Jews in general, and of himself the contradiction is not
very certain.]


9 (return) [ We have here, in that Greek MS. which was once Alexander
Petavius's, but is now in the library at Leyden, two most remarkable
additions to the common copies, though declared worth little remark by
the editor; which, upon the mention of Tiberius's coming to the empire,
inserts first the famous testimony of Josephus concerning Jesus Christ,
as it stands verbatim in the Antiquities, B. XVIII. ch. 3. sect. 3, with
some parts of that excellent discourse or homily of Josephus concerning
Hades, annexed to the work. But what is here principally to be noted
is this, that in this homily, Josephus having just mentioned Christ,
as "God the Word, and the Judge of the world, appointed by the Father,"
etc., adds, that "he had himself elsewhere spoken about him more nicely
or particularly."]


10 (return) [ This use of corban, or oblation, as here applied to the
sacred money dedicated to God in the treasury of the temple, illustrates
our Savior's words, Mark 7:11, 12.]


11 (return) [ Tacitus owns that Caius commanded the Jews to place his
effigies in their temple, though he be mistaken when he adds that the
Jews thereupon took arms.]


12 (return) [ This account of a place near the mouth of the river Belus
in Phoenicia, whence came that sand out of which the ancients made their
glass, is a known thing in history, particularly in Tacitus and Strabo,
and more largely in Pliny.]


13 (return) [ This Memnon had several monuments, and one of them
appears, both by Strabo and Diodorus, to have been in Syria, and not
improbably in this very place.]


14 (return) [ Reland notes here, that the Talmud in recounting ten sad
accidents for which the Jews ought to rend their garments, reckons this
for one, "When they hear that the law of God is burnt."]


15 (return) [ This Ummidius, or Numidius, or, as Tacitus calls him,
Vinidius Quadratus, is mentioned in an ancient inscription, still
preserved, as Spanhelm here informs us, which calls him Urnmidius
Quadratus.]


16 (return) [ Take the character of this Felix [who is well known from
the Acts of the Apostles, particularly from his trembling when St. Paul
discoursed of "righteousness, chastity, and judgment to come,"] Acts
24:5; and no wonder, when we have elsewhere seen that he lived in
adultery with Drusilla, another man's wife, [Antiq. B. XX. ch. 7.
sect. 1: in the words of Tacitus, produced here by Dean Aldrich: "Felix
exercised," says Tacitas, "the authority of a king, with the disposition
of a slave, and relying upon the great power of his brother Pallas
at court, thought he might safely be guilty of all kinds of wicked
practices." Observe also the time when he was made procurator, A.D. 52;
that when St. Paul pleaded his cause before him, A.D. 58, he might have
been "many years a judge unto that nation," as St. Paul says he had
then been, Acts 24:10. But as to what Tacitus here says, that before the
death of Cumanus, Felix was procurator over Samaria only, does not well
agree with St. Paul's words, who would hardly have called Samaria a
Jewish nation. In short, since what Tacitus here says is about countries
very remote from Rome, where he lived; since what he says of two Roman
procurators, the one over Galilee, the other over Samaria at the same
time, is without example elsewhere; and since Josephus, who lived
at that very time in Judea, appears to have known nothing of this
procuratorship of Felix, before the death of Cumanus; I much suspect
the story itself as nothing better than a mistake of Tacitus, especially
when it seems not only omitted, but contradicted by Josephus; as any one
may find that compares their histories together. Possibly Felix might
have been a subordinate judge among the Jews some time before under
Cumanus, but that he was in earnest a procurator of Samaria before I
do not believe. Bishop Pearson, as well as Bishop Lloyd, quote this
account, but with a doubtful clause: confides Tacito, "If we may believe
Tacitus." Pears. Anhal. Paulin. p. 8; Marshall's Tables, at A.D. 49.]


17 (return) [ i.e. Herod king of Chalcis.]


18 (return) [ Not long after this beginning of Florus, the wickedest of
all the Roman procurators of Judea, and the immediate occasion of the
Jewish war, at the twelfth year of Nero, and the seventeenth of Agrippa,
or A.D. 66, the history in the twenty books of Josephus's Antiquities
ends, although Josephus did not finish these books till the thirteenth
of Domitian, or A.D. 93, twenty-seven years afterward; as he did not
finish their Appendix, containing an account of his own life, till
Agrippa was dead, which happened in the third year of Trajan, or A. D.
100, as I have several times observed before.]


19 (return) [ Here we may note, that three millions of the Jews were
present at the passover, A.D. 65; which confirms what Josephus elsewhere
informs us of, that at a passover a little later they counted two
hundred and fifty-six thousand five hundred paschal lambs, which, at
twelve to each lamb, which is no immoderate calculation, come to three
millions and seventy-eight thousand. See B. VI. ch. 9. sect. 3.]


20 (return) [ Take here Dr. Hudson's very pertinent note. "By this
action," says he, "the killing of a bird over an earthen vessel, the
Jews were exposed as a leprous people; for that was to be done by the
law in the cleansing of a leper, Leviticus 14. It is also known that
the Gentiles reproached the Jews as subject to the leprosy, and believed
that they were driven out of Egypt on that account. This that eminent
person Mr. Reland suggested to me."]


21 (return) [ Here we have examples of native Jews who were of the
equestrian order among the Romans, and so ought never to have been
whipped or crucified, according to the Roman laws. See almost the like
case in St. Paul himself, Acts 22:25-29.]


22 (return) [ This vow which Bernice [here and elsewhere called queen,
not only as daughter and sister to two kings, Agrippa the Great, and
Agrippa junior, but the widow of Herod king of Chalcis] came now to
accomplish at Jerusalem was not that of a Nazarite, but such a one as
religious Jews used to make, in hopes of any deliverance from a disease,
or other danger, as Josephus here intimates. However, these thirty days'
abode at Jerusalem, for fasting and preparation against the oblation
of a proper sacrifice, seems to be too long, unless it were wholly
voluntary in this great lady. It is not required in the law of Moses
relating to Nazarites, Numbers 6., and is very different from St. Paul's
time for such preparation, which was but one day, Acts 21:26. So we want
already the continuation of the Antiquities to afford us light here, as
they have hitherto done on so many occasions elsewhere. Perhaps in this
age the traditions of the Pharisees had obliged the Jews to this degree
of rigor, not only as to these thirty days' preparation, but as to the
going barefoot all that time, which here Bernice submitted to also. For
we know that as God's and our Savior's yoke is usually easy, and his
burden comparatively light, in such positive injunctions, Matthew 11:30,
so did the scribes and Pharisees sometimes "bind upon men heavy burdens,
and grievous to be borne," even when they themselves "would not touch
them with one of their fingers," Matthew 23:4; Luke 11:46. However,
Noldius well observes, De Herod. No. 404, 414, that Juvenal, in his
sixth satire, alludes to this remarkable penance or submission of this
Bernice to Jewish discipline, and jests upon her for it; as do Tacitus,
Dio, Suetonius, and Sextus Aurelius mention her as one well known at
Rome.--Ibid.]


23 (return) [ I take this Bezetha to be that small hill adjoining to the
north side of the temple, whereon was the hospital with five porticoes
or cloisters, and beneath which was the sheep pool of Bethesda; into
which an angel or messenger, at a certain season, descended, and where
he or they who were the "first put into the pool" were cured, John 5:1
etc. This situation of Bezetha, in Josephus, on the north side of the
temple, and not far off the tower Antonia, exactly agrees to the place
of the same pool at this day; only the remaining cloisters are but
three. See Maundrel, p. 106. The entire buildings seem to have been
called the New City, and this part, where was the hospital, peculiarly
Bezetha or Bethesda. See ch. 19. sect. 4.]


24 (return) [ In this speech of king Agrippa we have an authentic
account of the extent and strength of the Roman empire when the Jewish
war began. And this speech with other circumstances in Josephus,
demonstrate how wise and how great a person Agrippa was, and why
Josephus elsewhere calls him a most wonderful or admirable man,
Contr. Ap. I. 9. He is the same Agrippa who said to Paul, "Almost thou
persuadest me to be a Christian," Acts 26;28; and of whom St. Paul said,
"He was expert in all the customs and questions of the Jews," yet. 3.
See another intimation of the limits of the same Roman empire, Of the
War, B. III. ch. 5. sect. 7. But what seems to me very remarkable here
is this, that when Josephus, in imitation of the Greeks and Romans, for
whose use he wrote his Antiquities, did himself frequently he into their
they appear, by the politeness of their composition, and their flights
of oratory, to be not the real speeches of the persons concerned, who
usually were no orators, but of his own elegant composure, the speech
before us is of another nature, full of undeniable facts, and composed
in a plain and unartful, but moving way; so it appears to be king
Agrippa's own speech, and to have been given Josephus by Agrippa
himself, with whom Josephus had the greatest friendship. Nor may we omit
Agrippa's constant doctrine here, that this vast Roman empire was raised
and supported by Divine Providence, and that therefore it was in vain
for the Jews, or any others, to think of destroying it. Nor may we
neglect to take notice of Agrippa's solemn appeal to the angels here
used; the like appeals to which we have in St. Paul, 1 Timothy 5:22, and
by the apostles in general, in the form of the ordination of bishops,
Constitut. Apost. VIII. 4.]


25 (return) [ Julius Caesar had decreed that the Jews of Jerusalem
should pay an annual tribute to the Romans, excepting the city Joppa,
and for the sabbatical year; as Spanheim observes from the Antiq. B.
XIV. ch. 10. sect. 6.]


26 (return) [ Of this Sohemus we have mention made by Tacitus. We also
learn from Dio that his father was king of the Arabians of Iturea,
[which Iturea is mentioned by St. Luke, ch. 3:1.] both whose testimonies
are quoted here by Dr. Hudson. See Noldius, No. 371.]


27 (return) [ Spanheim notes on the place, that this later Antiochus,
who was called Epiphaues, is mentioned by Dio, LIX. p. 645, and that he
is mentioned by Josephus elsewhere twice also, B.V. ch. 11. sect. 3; and
Antiq. B. XIX. ch. 8. sect. I.]


28 (return) [ Here we have an eminent example of that Jewish language,
which Dr. Wail truly observes, we several times find used in the sacred
writings; I mean, where the words "all" or "whole multitude," etc. are
used for much the greatest part only; but not so as to include every
person, without exception; for when Josephus had said that "the whole
multitude" [Footnote all the males] of Lydda were gone to the feast of
tabernacles, he immediately adds, that, however, no fewer than fifty
of them appeared, and were slain by the Romans. Other examples somewhat
like this I have observed elsewhere in Josephus, but, as I think, none
so remarkable as this. See Wall's Critical Observations on the Old
Testament, p. 49, 50.]


29 (return) [ We have also, in this and the next section, two eminent
facts to be observed, viz. the first example, that I remember, in
Josephus, of the onset of the Jews' enemies upon their country when
their males were gone up to Jerusalem to one of their three sacred
festivals; which, during the theocracy, God had promised to preserve
them from, Exodus 34:24. The second fact is this, the breach of the
sabbath by the seditions Jews in an offensive fight, contrary to the
universal doctrine and practice of their nation in these ages, and even
contrary to what they themselves afterward practiced in the rest of this
war. See the note on Antiq. B. XVI. ch. 2. sect. 4.]


30 (return) [ There may another very important, and very providential,
reason be here assigned for this strange and foolish retreat of Cestius;
which, if Josephus had been now a Christian, he might probably have
taken notice of also; and that is, the affording the Jewish Christians
in the city an opportunity of calling to mind the prediction and caution
given them by Christ about thirty-three years and a half before, that
"when they should see the abomination of desolation" [the idolatrous
Roman armies, with the images of their idols in their ensigns, ready
to lay Jerusalem desolate] "stand where it ought not;" or, "in the holy
place;" or, "when they should see Jerusalem any one instance of a more
unpolitic, but more providential, compassed with armies;" they should
then "flee to the mound conduct than this retreat of Cestius visible
during this whole rains." By complying with which those Jewish
Christians fled I siege of Jerusalem; which yet was providentially such
a "great to the mountains of Perea, and escaped this destruction. See
tribulation, as had not been from the beginning of the world to that
time; no, Lit. Accompl. of Proph. p. 69, 70. Nor was there, perhaps, nor
ever should be."--Ibid. p. 70, 71.]


31 (return) [ From this name of Joseph the son of Gorion, or Gorion
the son of Joseph, as B. IV. ch. 3. sect. 9, one of the governors of
Jerusalem, who was slain at the beginning of the tumults by the zealots,
B. IV. ch. 6. sect. 1, the much later Jewish author of a history of that
nation takes his title, and yet personates our true Josephus, the son of
Matthias; but the cheat is too gross to be put upon the learned world.]


32 (return) [ We may observe here, that the Idumeans, as having been
proselytes of justice since the days of John Hyrcanus, during about one
hundred and ninety-five years, were now esteemed as part of the Jewish
nation, and these provided of a Jewish commander accordingly. See the
note upon Antiq. B. XIII.. ch. 9. sect. 1.]


33 (return) [ We see here, and in Josephus's account of his own life,
sect. 14, how exactly he imitated his legislator Moses, or perhaps only
obeyed what he took to be his perpetual law, in appointing seven lesser
judges, for smaller causes, in particular cities, and perhaps for
the first hearing of greater causes, with the liberty of an appeal to
seventy-one supreme judges, especially in those causes where life and
death were concerned; as Antiq. B. IV. ch. 8. sect. 14; and of his Life,
sect. 14. See also Of the War, B. IV. ch. 5. sect. 4. Moreover, we find,
sect. 7, that he imitated Moses, as well as the Romans, in the number
and distribution of the subaltern officers of his army, as Exodus 18:25;
Deuteronomy 1:15; and in his charge against the offenses common among
soldiers, as Denteronomy 13:9; in all which he showed his great wisdom
and piety, and skillful conduct in martial affairs. Yet may we discern
in his very high character of Artanus the high priest, B. IV. ch. 5.
sect. 2, who seems to have been the same who condemned St. James, bishop
of Jerusalem, to be stoned, under Albinus the procurator, that when
he wrote these books of the War, he was not so much as an Ebionite
Christian; otherwise he would not have failed, according to his usual
custom, to have reckoned this his barbarous murder as a just punishment
upon him for that his cruelty to the chief, or rather only Christian
bishop of the circumcision. Nor, had he been then a Christian, could he
immediately have spoken so movingly of the causes of the destruction
of Jerusalem, without one word of either the condemnation of James,
or crucifixion of Christ, as he did when he was become a Christian
afterward.]


34 (return) [ I should think that an army of sixty thousand footmen
should require many more than two hundred and fifty horsemen; and we
find Josephus had more horsemen under his command than two hundred and
fifty in his future history. I suppose the number of the thousands is
dropped in our present copies.]


35 (return) [ I cannot but think this stratagem of Josephus, which is
related both here and in his Life, sect. 32, 33, to be one of the finest
that ever was invented and executed by any warrior whatsoever.]







BOOK III.


     Containing The Interval Of About One Year.

     From Vespasian's Coming To Subdue The Jews To The Taking Of
     Gamala.





CHAPTER 1.


     Vespasian Is Sent Into Syria By Nero In Order To Make War
     With The Jews.

1. When Nero was informed of the Romans' ill success in Judea, a
concealed consternation and terror, as is usual in such cases, fell upon
him; although he openly looked very big, and was very angry, and
said that what had happened was rather owing to the negligence of the
commander, than to any valor of the enemy: and as he thought it fit
for him, who bare the burden of the whole empire, to despise such
misfortunes, he now pretended so to do, and to have a soul superior to
all such sad accidents whatsoever. Yet did the disturbance that was in
his soul plainly appear by the solicitude he was in [how to recover his
affairs again].

2. And as he was deliberating to whom he should commit the care of the
East, now it was in so great a commotion, and who might be best able
to punish the Jews for their rebellion, and might prevent the same
distemper from seizing upon the neighboring nations also,--he found
no one but Vespasian equal to the task, and able to undergo the great
burden of so mighty a war, seeing he was growing an old man already in
the camp, and from his youth had been exercised in warlike exploits: he
was also a man that had long ago pacified the west, and made it subject
to the Romans, when it had been put into disorder by the Germans; he had
also recovered to them Britain by his arms, which had been little known
before 1 whereby he procured to his father Claudius to have a triumph
bestowed on him without any sweat or labor of his own.

3. So Nero esteemed these circumstances as favorable omens, and saw that
Vespasian's age gave him sure experience, and great skill, and that
he had his sons as hostages for his fidelity to himself, and that the
flourishing age they were in would make them fit instruments under
their father's prudence. Perhaps also there was some interposition
of Providence, which was paving the way for Vespasian's being himself
emperor afterwards. Upon the whole, he sent this man to take upon him
the command of the armies that were in Syria; but this not without great
encomiums and flattering compellations, such as necessity required, and
such as might mollify him into complaisance. So Vespasian sent his son
Titus from Achaia, where he had been with Nero, to Alexandria, to bring
back with him from thence the fifth and the tenth legions, while he
himself, when he had passed over the Hellespont, came by land into
Syria, where he gathered together the Roman forces, with a considerable
number of auxiliaries from the kings in that neighborhood.






CHAPTER 2.


     A Great Slaughter About Ascalon. Vespasian Comes To
     Ptolemais.

1. Now the Jews, after they had beaten Cestius, were so much elevated
with their unexpected success, that they could not govern their zeal,
but, like people blown up into a flame by their good fortune, carried
the war to remoter places. Accordingly, they presently got together a
great multitude of all their most hardy soldiers, and marched away for
Ascalon. This is an ancient city that is distant from Jerusalem five
hundred and twenty furlongs, and was always an enemy to the Jews; on
which account they determined to make their first effort against it, and
to make their approaches to it as near as possible. This excursion was
led on by three men, who were the chief of them all, both for strength
and sagacity; Niger, called the Persite, Silas of Babylon, and besides
them John the Essene. Now Ascalon was strongly walled about, but had
almost no assistance to be relied on [near them], for the garrison
consisted of one cohort of footmen, and one troop of horsemen, whose
captain was Antonius.

2. These Jews, therefore, out of their anger, marched faster than
ordinary, and, as if they had come but a little way, approached very
near the city, and were come even to it; but Antonius, who was not
unapprized of the attack they were going to make upon the city, drew out
his horsemen beforehand, and being neither daunted at the multitude,
nor at the courage of the enemy, received their first attacks with great
bravery; and when they crowded to the very walls, he beat them off. Now
the Jews were unskillful in war, but were to fight with those who were
skillful therein; they were footmen to fight with horsemen; they were
in disorder, to fight those that were united together; they were poorly
armed, to fight those that were completely so; they were to fight more
by their rage than by sober counsel, and were exposed to soldiers that
were exactly obedient; and did every thing they were bidden upon the
least intimation. So they were easily beaten; for as soon as ever
their first ranks were once in disorder, they were put to flight by the
enemy's cavalry, and those of them that came behind such as crowded to
the wall fell upon their own party's weapons, and became one another's
enemies; and this so long till they were all forced to give way to the
attacks of the horsemen, and were dispersed all the plain over, which
plain was wide, and all fit for the horsemen; which circumstance was
very commodious for the Romans, and occasioned the slaughter of the
greatest number of the Jews; for such as ran away, they could overrun
them, and make them turn back; and when they had brought them back after
their flight, and driven them together, they ran them through, and slew
a vast number of them, insomuch that others encompassed others of them,
and drove them before them whithersoever they turned themselves, and
slew them easily with their arrows; and the great number there were of
the Jews seemed a solitude to themselves, by reason of the distress they
were in, while the Romans had such good success with their small number,
that they seemed to themselves to be the greater multitude. And as the
former strove zealously under their misfortunes, out of the shame of
a sudden flight, and hopes of the change in their success, so did the
latter feel no weariness by reason of their good fortune; insomuch that
the fight lasted till the evening, till ten thousand men of the Jews'
side lay dead, with two of their generals, John and Silas, and the
greater part of the remainder were wounded, with Niger, their remaining
general, who fled away together to a small city of Idumea, called
Sallis. Some few also of the Romans were wounded in this battle.

3. Yet were not the spirits of the Jews broken by so great a calamity,
but the losses they had sustained rather quickened their resolution for
other attempts; for, overlooking the dead bodies which lay under their
feet, they were enticed by their former glorious actions to venture on
a second destruction; so when they had lain still so little a while that
their wounds were not yet thoroughly cured, they got together all their
forces, and came with greater fury, and in much greater numbers, to
Ascalon. But their former ill fortune followed them, as the consequence
of their unskilfulness, and other deficiencies in war; for Antonius laid
ambushes for them in the passages they were to go through, where they
fell into snares unexpectedly, and where they were encompassed about
with horsemen, before they could form themselves into a regular body for
fighting, and were above eight thousand of them slain; so all the rest
of them ran away, and with them Niger, who still did a great many bold
exploits in his flight. However, they were driven along together by the
enemy, who pressed hard upon them, into a certain strong tower belonging
to a village called Bezedeh However, Antonius and his party, that they
might neither spend any considerable time about this tower, which was
hard to be taken, nor suffer their commander, and the most courageous
man of them all, to escape from them, they set the wall on fire; and as
the tower was burning, the Romans went away rejoicing, as taking it for
granted that Niger was destroyed; but he leaped out of the tower into a
subterraneous cave, in the innermost part of it, and was preserved; and
on the third day afterward he spake out of the ground to those that with
great lamentation were searching for him, in order to give him a decent
funeral; and when he was come out, he filled all the Jews with an
unexpected joy, as though he were preserved by God's providence to be
their commander for the time to come.

4. And now Vespasian took along with him his army from Antioch, [which
is the metropolis of Syria, and without dispute deserves the place of
the third city in the habitable earth that was under the Roman empire,
2 both in magnitude, and other marks of prosperity,] where he found king
Agrippa, with all his forces, waiting for his coming, and marched to
Ptolemais. At this city also the inhabitants of Sepphoris of Galilee met
him, who were for peace with the Romans. These citizens had beforehand
taken care of their own safety, and being sensible of the power of the
Romans, they had been with Cestius Gallus before Vespasian came, and had
given their faith to him, and received the security of his right hand,
and had received a Roman garrison; and at this time withal they received
Vespasian, the Roman general, very kindly, and readily promised that
they would assist him against their own countrymen. Now the general
delivered them, at their desire, as many horsemen and footmen as he
thought sufficient to oppose the incursions of the Jews, if they should
come against them. And indeed the danger of losing Sepphoris would be no
small one, in this war that was now beginning, seeing it was the largest
city of Galilee, and built in a place by nature very strong, and might
be a security of the whole nation's [fidelity to the Romans].






CHAPTER 3.


     A Description Of Galilee, Samaria, And Judea.

1. Now Phoenicia and Syria encompass about the Galilees, which are two,
and called the Upper Galilee and the Lower. They are bounded toward the
sun-setting, with the borders of the territory belonging to Ptolemais,
and by Carmel; which mountain had formerly belonged to the Galileans,
but now belonged to the Tyrians; to which mountain adjoins Gaba,
which is called the City of Horsemen, because those horsemen that were
dismissed by Herod the king dwelt therein; they are bounded on the south
with Samaria and Scythopolis, as far as the river Jordan; on the east
with Hippeae and Gadaris, and also with Ganlonitis, and the borders of
the kingdom of Agrippa; its northern parts are bounded by Tyre, and the
country of the Tyrians. As for that Galilee which is called the Lower,
it, extends in length from Tiberias to Zabulon, and of the maritime
places Ptolemais is its neighbor; its breadth is from the village called
Xaloth, which lies in the great plain, as far as Bersabe, from which
beginning also is taken the breadth of the Upper Galilee, as far as the
village Baca, which divides the land of the Tyrians from it; its length
is also from Meloth to Thella, a village near to Jordan.

2. These two Galilees, of so great largeness, and encompassed with
so many nations of foreigners, have been always able to make a strong
resistance on all occasions of war; for the Galileans are inured to war
from their infancy, and have been always very numerous; nor hath the
country been ever destitute of men of courage, or wanted a numerous set
of them; for their soil is universally rich and fruitful, and full of
the plantations of trees of all sorts, insomuch that it invites the
most slothful to take pains in its cultivation, by its fruitfulness;
accordingly, it is all cultivated by its inhabitants, and no part of it
lies idle. Moreover, the cities lie here very thick, and the very
many villages there are here are every where so full of people, by
the richness of their soil, that the very least of them contain above
fifteen thousand inhabitants.

3. In short, if any one will suppose that Galilee is inferior to Perea
in magnitude, he will be obliged to prefer it before it in its strength;
for this is all capable of cultivation, and is every where fruitful; but
for Perea, which is indeed much larger in extent, the greater part of
it is desert and rough, and much less disposed for the production of the
milder kinds of fruits; yet hath it a moist soil [in other parts], and
produces all kinds of fruits, and its plains are planted with trees of
all sorts, while yet the olive tree, the vine, and the palm tree are
chiefly cultivated there. It is also sufficiently watered with torrents,
which issue out of the mountains, and with springs that never fail to
run, even when the torrents fail them, as they do in the dog-days. Now
the length of Perea is from Machaerus to Pella, and its breadth from
Philadelphia to Jordan; its northern parts are bounded by Pella, as we
have already said, as well as its Western with Jordan; the land of Moab
is its southern border, and its eastern limits reach to Arabia, and
Silbonitis, and besides to Philadelphene and Gerasa.

4. Now as to the country of Samaria, it lies between Judea and Galilee;
it begins at a village that is in the great plain called Ginea, and
ends at the Acrabbene toparchy, and is entirely of the same nature with
Judea; for both countries are made up of hills and valleys, and are
moist enough for agriculture, and are very fruitful. They have abundance
of trees, and are full of autumnal fruit, both that which grows wild,
and that which is the effect of cultivation. They are not naturally
watered by many rivers, but derive their chief moisture from rain-water,
of which they have no want; and for those rivers which they have, all
their waters are exceeding sweet: by reason also of the excellent grass
they have, their cattle yield more milk than do those in other places;
and, what is the greatest sign of excellency and of abundance, they each
of them are very full of people.

5. In the limits of Samaria and Judea lies the village Anuath, which is
also named Borceos. This is the northern boundary of Judea. The southern
parts of Judea, if they be measured lengthways, are bounded by a Village
adjoining to the confines of Arabia; the Jews that dwell there call it
Jordan. However, its breadth is extended from the river Jordan to Joppa.
The city Jerusalem is situated in the very middle; on which account some
have, with sagacity enough, called that city the Navel of the country.
Nor indeed is Judea destitute of such delights as come from the sea,
since its maritime places extend as far as Ptolemais: it was parted into
eleven portions, of which the royal city Jerusalem was the supreme, and
presided over all the neighboring country, as the head does over the
body. As to the other cities that were inferior to it, they presided
over their several toparchies; Gophna was the second of those cities,
and next to that Acrabatta, after them Thamna, and Lydda, and Emmaus,
and Pella, and Idumea, and Engaddi, and Herodium, and Jericho; and after
them came Jamnia and Joppa, as presiding over the neighboring people;
and besides these there was the region of Gamala, and Gaulonitis,
and Batanea, and Trachonitis, which are also parts of the kingdom of
Agrippa. This [last] country begins at Mount Libanus, and the fountains
of Jordan, and reaches breadthways to the lake of Tiberias; and in
length is extended from a village called Arpha, as far as Julias. Its
inhabitants are a mixture of Jews and Syrians. And thus have I, with
all possible brevity, described the country of Judea, and those that lie
round about it.






CHAPTER 4.


     Josephus Makes An Attempt Upon Sepphoris But Is Repelled.
     Titus Comes With A Great Army To Ptolemais.

1. Now the auxiliaries which were sent to assist the people of
Sepphoris, being a thousand horsemen, and six thousand footmen, under
Placidus the tribune, pitched their camp in two bodies in the great
plain. The foot were put into the city to be a guard to it, but the
horse lodged abroad in the camp. These last, by marching continually one
way or other, and overrunning the parts of the adjoining country, were
very troublesome to Josephus and his men; they also plundered all the
places that were out of the city's liberty, and intercepted such as
durst go abroad. On this account it was that Josephus marched against
the city, as hoping to take what he had lately encompassed with so
strong a wall, before they revolted from the rest of the Galileans, that
the Romans would have much ado to take it; by which means he proved too
weak, and failed of his hopes, both as to the forcing the place, and as
to his prevailing with the people of Sepphoris to deliver it up to him.
By this means he provoked the Romans to treat the country according to
the law of war; nor did the Romans, out of the anger they bore at this
attempt, leave off, either by night or by day, burning the places in
the plain, and stealing away the cattle that were in the country, and
killing whatsoever appeared capable of fighting perpetually, and leading
the weaker people as slaves into captivity; so that Galilee was all over
filled with fire and blood; nor was it exempted from any kind of misery
or calamity, for the only refuge they had was this, that when they were
pursued, they could retire to the cities which had walls built them by
Josephus.

2. But as to Titus, he sailed over from Achaia to Alexandria, and that
sooner than the winter season did usually permit; so he took with him
those forces he was sent for, and marching with great expedition, he
came suddenly to Ptolemais, and there finding his father, together with
the two legions, the fifth and the tenth, which were the most eminent
legions of all, he joined them to that fifteenth legion which was with
his father; eighteen cohorts followed these legions; there came also
five cohorts from Cesarea, with one troop of horsemen, and five other
troops of horsemen from Syria. Now these ten cohorts had severally a
thousand footmen, but the other thirteen cohorts had no more than six
hundred footmen apiece, with a hundred and twenty horsemen. There were
also a considerable number of auxiliaries got together, that came from
the kings Antiochus, and Agrippa, and Sohemus, each of them contributing
one thousand footmen that were archers, and a thousand horsemen.
Malchus also, the king of Arabia, sent a thousand horsemen, besides five
thousand footmen, the greatest part of which were archers; so that
the whole army, including the auxiliaries sent by the kings, as well
horsemen as footmen, when all were united together, amounted to sixty
thousand, besides the servants, who, as they followed in vast numbers,
so because they had been trained up in war with the rest, ought not
to be distinguished from the fighting men; for as they were in their
masters' service in times of peace, so did they undergo the like dangers
with them in times of war, insomuch that they were inferior to none,
either in skill or in strength, only they were subject to their masters.






CHAPTER 5.


     A Description Of The Roman Armies And Roman Camps And Of
     Other Particulars For Which The Romans Are Commended.

1. Now here one cannot but admire at the precaution of the Romans, in
providing themselves of such household servants, as might not only serve
at other times for the common offices of life, but might also be of
advantage to them in their wars. And, indeed, if any one does but attend
to the other parts of their military discipline, he will be forced
to confess that their obtaining so large a dominion hath been the
acquisition of their valor, and not the bare gift of fortune; for they
do not begin to use their weapons first in time of war, nor do they then
put their hands first into motion, while they avoided so to do in times
of peace; but, as if their weapons did always cling to them, they have
never any truce from warlike exercises; nor do they stay till times of
war admonish them to use them; for their military exercises differ not
at all from the real use of their arms, but every soldier is every day
exercised, and that with great diligence, as if it were in time of war,
which is the reason why they bear the fatigue of battles so easily; for
neither can any disorder remove them from their usual regularity,
nor can fear affright them out of it, nor can labor tire them; which
firmness of conduct makes them always to overcome those that have not
the same firmness; nor would he be mistaken that should call those their
exercises unbloody battles, and their battles bloody exercises. Nor
can their enemies easily surprise them with the suddenness of their
incursions; for as soon as they have marched into an enemy's land, they
do not begin to fight till they have walled their camp about; nor is the
fence they raise rashly made, or uneven; nor do they all abide in it,
nor do those that are in it take their places at random; but if it
happens that the ground is uneven, it is first leveled: their camp is
also four-square by measure, and carpenters are ready, in great numbers,
with their tools, to erect their buildings for them. 3

2. As for what is within the camp, it is set apart for tents, but the
outward circumference hath the resemblance to a wall, and is adorned
with towers at equal distances, where between the towers stand the
engines for throwing arrows and darts, and for slinging stones, and
where they lay all other engines that can annoy the enemy, all ready for
their several operations. They also erect four gates, one at every side
of the circumference, and those large enough for the entrance of the
beasts, and wide enough for making excursions, if occasion should
require. They divide the camp within into streets, very conveniently,
and place the tents of the commanders in the middle; but in the very
midst of all is the general's own tent, in the nature of a temple,
insomuch, that it appears to be a city built on the sudden, with its
market-place, and place for handicraft trades, and with seats for the
officers superior and inferior, where, if any differences arise, their
causes are heard and determined. The camp, and all that is in it, is
encompassed with a wall round about, and that sooner than one would
imagine, and this by the multitude and the skill of the laborers; and,
if occasion require, a trench is drawn round the whole, whose depth is
four cubits, and its breadth equal.

3. When they have thus secured themselves, they live together by
companies, with quietness and decency, as are all their other affairs
managed with good order and security. Each company hath also their wood,
and their corn, and their water brought them, when they stand in need
of them; for they neither sup nor dine as they please themselves singly,
but all together. Their times also for sleeping, and watching, and
rising are notified beforehand by the sound of trumpets, nor is any
thing done without such a signal; and in the morning the soldiery go
every one to their centurions, and these centurions to their tribunes,
to salute them; with whom all the superior officers go to the general
of the whole army, who then gives them of course the watchword and other
orders, to be by them carried to all that are under their command; which
is also observed when they go to fight, and thereby they turn themselves
about on the sudden, when there is occasion for making sallies, as they
come back when they are recalled in crowds also.

4. Now when they are to go out of their camp, the trumpet gives a sound,
at which time nobody lies still, but at the first intimation they take
down their tents, and all is made ready for their going out; then do the
trumpets sound again, to order them to get ready for the march; then do
they lay their baggage suddenly upon their mules, and other beasts of
burden, and stand, as at the place of starting, ready to march; when
also they set fire to their camp, and this they do because it will be
easy for them to erect another camp, and that it may not ever be of use
to their enemies. Then do the trumpets give a sound the third time, that
they are to go out, in order to excite those that on any account are
a little tardy, that so no one may be out of his rank when the army
marches. Then does the crier stand at the general's right hand, and asks
them thrice, in their own tongue, whether they be now ready to go out
to war or not? To which they reply as often, with a loud and cheerful
voice, saying, "We are ready." And this they do almost before the
question is asked them: they do this as filled with a kind of martial
fury, and at the same time that they so cry out, they lift up their
right hands also.

5. When, after this, they are gone out of their camp, they all march
without noise, and in a decent manner, and every one keeps his own rank,
as if they were going to war. The footmen are armed with breastplates
and head-pieces, and have swords on each side; but the sword which is
upon their left side is much longer than the other, for that on the
right side is not longer than a span. Those foot-men also that are
chosen out from the rest to be about the general himself have a lance
and a buckler, but the rest of the foot soldiers have a spear and a long
buckler, besides a saw and a basket, a pick-axe and an axe, a thong of
leather and a hook, with provisions for three days, so that a footman
hath no great need of a mule to carry his burdens. The horsemen have
a long sword on their right sides, axed a long pole in their hand; a
shield also lies by them obliquely on one side of their horses, with
three or more darts that are borne in their quiver, having broad
points, and not smaller than spears. They have also head-pieces and
breastplates, in like manner as have all the footmen. And for those that
are chosen to be about the general, their armor no way differs from
that of the horsemen belonging to other troops; and he always leads the
legions forth to whom the lot assigns that employment.

6. This is the manner of the marching and resting of the Romans, as also
these are the several sorts of weapons they use. But when they are to
fight, they leave nothing without forecast, nor to be done off-hand, but
counsel is ever first taken before any work is begun, and what hath been
there resolved upon is put in execution presently; for which reason they
seldom commit any errors; and if they have been mistaken at any time,
they easily correct those mistakes. They also esteem any errors they
commit upon taking counsel beforehand to be better than such rash
success as is owing to fortune only; because such a fortuitous advantage
tempts them to be inconsiderate, while consultation, though it may
sometimes fail of success, hath this good in it, that it makes men more
careful hereafter; but for the advantages that arise from chance,
they are not owing to him that gains them; and as to what melancholy
accidents happen unexpectedly, there is this comfort in them, that they
had however taken the best consultations they could to prevent them.

7. Now they so manage their preparatory exercises of their weapons, that
not the bodies of the soldiers only, but their souls may also become
stronger: they are moreover hardened for war by fear; for their laws
inflict capital punishments, not only for soldiers running away from the
ranks, but for slothfulness and inactivity, though it be but in a lesser
degree; as are their generals more severe than their laws, for they
prevent any imputation of cruelty toward those under condemnation, by
the great rewards they bestow on the valiant soldiers; and the readiness
of obeying their commanders is so great, that it is very ornamental in
peace; but when they come to a battle, the whole army is but one body,
so well coupled together are their ranks, so sudden are their turnings
about, so sharp their hearing as to what orders are given them, so quick
their sight of the ensigns, and so nimble are their hands when they set
to work; whereby it comes to pass that what they do is done quickly, and
what they suffer they bear with the greatest patience. Nor can we find
any examples where they have been conquered in battle, when they came
to a close fight, either by the multitude of the enemies, or by their
stratagems, or by the difficulties in the places they were in; no, nor
by fortune neither, for their victories have been surer to them than
fortune could have granted them. In a case, therefore, where counsel
still goes before action, and where, after taking the best advice,
that advice is followed by so active an army, what wonder is it that
Euphrates on the east, the ocean on the west, the most fertile regions
of Libya on the south, and the Danube and the Rhine on the north, are
the limits of this empire? One might well say that the Roman possessions
are not inferior to the Romans themselves.

8. This account I have given the reader, not so much with the intention
of commending the Romans, as of comforting those that have been
conquered by them, and for the deterring others from attempting
innovations under their government. This discourse of the Roman military
conduct may also perhaps be of use to such of the curious as are
ignorant of it, and yet have a mind to know it. I return now from this
digression.






CHAPTER 6.


     Placidus Attempts To Take Jotapata And Is Beaten Off.
     Vespasian Marches Into Galilee.

1. And now Vespasian, with his son Titus, had tarried some time at
Ptolemais, and had put his army in order. But when Placidus, who had
overrun Galilee, and had besides slain a number of those whom he had
caught, [which were only the weaker part of the Galileans, and such
as were of timorous souls,] saw that the warriors ran always to those
cities whose walls had been built by Josephus, he marched furiously
against Jotapata, which was of them all the strongest, as supposing he
should easily take it by a sudden surprise, and that he should thereby
obtain great honor to himself among the commanders, and bring a great
advantage to them in their future campaign; because if this strongest
place of them all were once taken, the rest would be so affrighted as to
surrender themselves. But he was mightily mistaken in his undertaking;
for the men of Jotapata were apprized of his coming to attack them, and
came out of the city, and expected him there. So they fought the Romans
briskly when they least expected it, being both many in number, and
prepared for fighting, and of great alacrity, as esteeming their
country, their wives, and their children to be in danger, and easily put
the Romans to flight, and wounded many of them, and slew seven of them;
4 because their retreat was not made in a disorderly manner, because
the strokes only touched the surface of their bodies, which were covered
with their armor in all parts, and because the Jews did rather throw
their weapons upon them from a great distance, than venture to come hand
to hand with them, and had only light armor on, while the others were
completely armed. However, three men of the Jews' side were slain, and
a few wounded; so Placidus, finding himself unable to assault the city,
ran away.

2. But as Vespasian had a great mind to fall upon Galilee, he marched
out of Ptolemais, having put his army into that order wherein the Romans
used to march. He ordered those auxiliaries which were lightly armed,
and the archers, to march first, that they might prevent any sudden
insults from the enemy, and might search out the woods that looked
suspiciously, and were capable of ambuscades. Next to these followed
that part of the Romans which was completely armed, both footmen and
horsemen. Next to these followed ten out of every hundred, carrying
along with them their arms, and what was necessary to measure out a camp
withal; and after them, such as were to make the road even and straight,
and if it were any where rough and hard to be passed over, to plane it,
and to cut down the woods that hindered their march, that the army might
not be in distress, or tired with their march. Behind these he set
such carriages of the army as belonged both to himself and to the other
commanders, with a considerable number of their horsemen for their
security. After these he marched himself, having with him a select body
of footmen, and horsemen, and pikemen. After these came the peculiar
cavalry of his own legion, for there were a hundred and twenty horsemen
that peculiarly belonged to every legion. Next to these came the mules
that carried the engines for sieges, and the other warlike machines
of that nature. After these came the commanders of the cohorts and
tribunes, having about them soldiers chosen out of the rest. Then came
the ensigns encompassing the eagle, which is at the head of every Roman
legion, the king, and the strongest of all birds, which seems to them a
signal of dominion, and an omen that they shall conquer all against whom
they march; these sacred ensigns are followed by the trumpeters. Then
came the main army in their squadrons and battalions, with six men in
depth, which were followed at last by a centurion, who, according to
custom, observed the rest. As for the servants of every legion, they
all followed the footmen, and led the baggage of the soldiers, which
was borne by the mules and other beasts of burden. But behind all the
legions came the whole multitude of the mercenaries; and those that
brought up the rear came last of all for the security of the whole army,
being both footmen, and those in their armor also, with a great number
of horsemen.

3. And thus did Vespasian march with his army, and came to the bounds of
Galilee, where he pitched his camp and restrained his soldiers, who
were eager for war; he also showed his army to the enemy, in order
to affright them, and to afford them a season for repentance, to see
whether they would change their minds before it came to a battle, and at
the same time he got things ready for besieging their strong minds. And
indeed this sight of the general brought many to repent of their revolt,
and put them all into a consternation; for those that were in Josephus's
camp, which was at the city called Garis, not far from Sepphoris, when
they heard that the war was come near them, and that the Romans would
suddenly fight them hand to hand, dispersed themselves and fled, not
only before they came to a battle, but before the enemy ever came in
sight, while Josephus and a few others were left behind; and as he saw
that he had not an army sufficient to engage the enemy, that the spirits
of the Jews were sunk, and that the greater part would willingly come to
terms, if they might be credited, he already despaired of the success of
the whole war, and determined to get as far as he possibly could out
of danger; so he took those that staid along with him, and fled to
Tiberias.






CHAPTER 7.


     Vespasian, When He Had Taken The City Gadaea Marches To
     Jotapata. After A Long Siege The City Is Betrayed By A
     Deserter, And Taken By Vespasian.

1. So Vespasian marched to the city Gadara, and took it upon the first
onset, because he found it destitute of any considerable number of men
grown up and fit for war. He came then into it, and slew all the youth,
the Romans having no mercy on any age whatsoever; and this was done out
of the hatred they bore the nation, and because of the iniquity they had
been guilty of in the affair of Cestius. He also set fire not only to
the city itself, but to all the villas and small cities that were round
about it; some of them were quite destitute of inhabitants, and out of
some of them he carried the inhabitants as slaves into captivity.

2. As to Josephus, his retiring to that city which he chose as the most
fit for his security, put it into great fear; for the people of Tiberias
did not imagine that he would have run away, unless he had entirely
despaired of the success of the war. And indeed, as to that point, they
were not mistaken about his opinion; for he saw whither the affairs of
the Jews would tend at last, and was sensible that they had but one way
of escaping, and that was by repentance. However, although he expected
that the Romans would forgive him, yet did he choose to die many times
over, rather than to betray his country, and to dishonor that supreme
command of the army which had been intrusted with him, or to live
happily under those against whom he was sent to fight. He determined,
therefore, to give an exact account of affairs to the principal men at
Jerusalem by a letter, that he might not, by too much aggrandizing the
power of the enemy, make them too timorous; nor, by relating that their
power beneath the truth, might encourage them to stand out when they
were perhaps disposed to repentance. He also sent them word, that if
they thought of coming to terms, they must suddenly write him an answer;
or if they resolved upon war, they must send him an army sufficient
to fight the Romans. Accordingly, he wrote these things, and sent
messengers immediately to carry his letter to Jerusalem.

3. Now Vespasian was very desirous of demolishing Jotapata, for he had
gotten intelligence that the greatest part of the enemy had retired
thither, and that it was, on other accounts, a place of great security
to them. Accordingly, he sent both foot-men and horsemen to level the
road, which was mountainous and rocky, not without difficulty to be
traveled over by footmen, but absolutely impracticable for horsemen. Now
these workmen accomplished what they were about in four days' time,
and opened a broad way for the army. On the fifth day, which was the
twenty-first of the month Artemisius, [Jyar,] Josephus prevented him,
and came from Tiberias, and went into Jotapata, and raised the drooping
spirits of the Jews. And a certain deserter told this good news to
Vespasian, that Josephus had removed himself thither, which made him
make haste to the city, as supposing that with taking that he should
take all Judea, in case he could but withal get Josephus under his
power. So he took this news to be of the vastest advantage to him, and
believed it to be brought about by the providence of God, that he who
appeared to be the most prudent man of all their enemies, had, of his
own accord, shut himself up in a place of sure custody. Accordingly, he
sent Placidus with a thousand horsemen, and Ebutius a decurion, a person
that was of eminency both in council and in action, to encompass the
city round, that Josephus might not escape away privately.

4. Vespasian also, the very next day, took his whole army and followed
them, and by marching till late in the evening, arrived then at
Jotapata; and bringing his army to the northern side of the city, he
pitched his camp on a certain small hill which was seven furlongs from
the city, and still greatly endeavored to be well seen by the enemy, to
put them into a consternation; which was indeed so terrible to the Jews
immediately, that no one of them durst go out beyond the wall. Yet did
the Romans put off the attack at that time, because they had marched all
the day, although they placed a double row of battalions round the
city, with a third row beyond them round the whole, which consisted of
cavalry, in order to stop up every way for an exit; which thing making
the Jews despair of escaping, excited them to act more boldly; for
nothing makes men fight so desperately in war as necessity.

5. Now when the next day an assault was made by the Romans, the Jews at
first staid out of the walls and opposed them, and met them, as having
formed themselves a camp before the city walls. But when Vespasian had
set against them the archers and slingers, and the whole multitude that
could throw to a great distance, he permitted them to go to work, while
he himself, with the footmen, got upon an acclivity, whence the city
might easily be taken. Josephus was then in fear for the city, and
leaped out, and all the Jewish multitude with him; these fell together
upon the Romans in great numbers, and drove them away from the wall, and
performed a great many glorious and bold actions. Yet did they suffer
as much as they made the enemy suffer; for as despair of deliverance
encouraged the Jews, so did a sense of shame equally encourage the
Romans. These last had skill as well as strength; the other had only
courage, which armed them, and made them fight furiously. And when the
fight had lasted all day, it was put an end to by the coming on of the
night. They had wounded a great many of the Romans, and killed of them
thirteen men; of the Jews' side seventeen were slain, and six hundred
wounded.

6. On the next day the Jews made another attack upon the Romans, and
went out of the walls and fought a much more desperate battle with them
than before. For they were now become more courageous than formerly, and
that on account of the unexpected good opposition they had made the day
before, as they found the Romans also to fight more desperately; for a
sense of shame inflamed these into a passion, as esteeming their failure
of a sudden victory to be a kind of defeat. Thus did the Romans try to
make an impression upon the Jews till the fifth day continually, while
the people of Jotapata made sallies out, and fought at the walls most
desperately; nor were the Jews affrighted at the strength of the enemy,
nor were the Romans discouraged at the difficulties they met with in
taking the city.

7. Now Jotapata is almost all of it built on a precipice, having on
all the other sides of it every way valleys immensely deep and steep,
insomuch that those who would look down would have their sight fail them
before it reaches to the bottom. It is only to be come at on the north
side, where the utmost part of the city is built on the mountain, as it
ends obliquely at a plain. This mountain Josephus had encompassed with
a wall when he fortified the city, that its top might not be capable
of being seized upon by the enemies. The city is covered all round with
other mountains, and can no way be seen till a man comes just upon it.
And this was the strong situation of Jotapata.

8. Vespasian, therefore, in order to try how he might overcome the
natural strength of the place, as well as the bold defense of the Jews,
made a resolution to prosecute the siege with vigor. To that end he
called the commanders that were under him to a council of war, and
consulted with them which way the assault might be managed to the best
advantage. And when the resolution was there taken to raise a bank
against that part of the wall which was practicable, he sent his whole
army abroad to get the materials together. So when they had cut down
all the trees on the mountains that adjoined to the city, and had gotten
together a vast heap of stones, besides the wood they had cut down, some
of them brought hurdles, in order to avoid the effects of the darts that
were shot from above them. These hurdles they spread over their banks,
under cover whereof they formed their bank, and so were little or
nothing hurt by the darts that were thrown upon them from the wall,
while others pulled the neighboring hillocks to pieces, and perpetually
brought earth to them; so that while they were busy three sorts of ways,
nobody was idle. However, the Jews cast great stones from the walls upon
the hurdles which protected the men, with all sorts of darts also; and
the noise of what could not reach them was yet so terrible, that it was
some impediment to the workmen.

9. Vespasian then set the engines for throwing stones and darts round
about the city. The number of the engines was in all a hundred and
sixty, and bid them fall to work, and dislodge those that were upon the
wall. At the same time such engines as were intended for that purpose
threw at once lances upon them with a great noise, and stones of the
weight of a talent were thrown by the engines that were prepared for
that purpose, together with fire, and a vast multitude of arrows, which
made the wall so dangerous, that the Jews durst not only not come
upon it, but durst not come to those parts within the walls which were
reached by the engines; for the multitude of the Arabian archers, as
well also as all those that threw darts and slung stones, fell to work
at the same time with the engines. Yet did not the others lie still,
when they could not throw at the Romans from a higher place; for they
then made sallies out of the city, like private robbers, by parties, and
pulled away the hurdles that covered the workmen, and killed them when
they were thus naked; and when those workmen gave way, these cast away
the earth that composed the bank, and burnt the wooden parts of it,
together with the hurdles, till at length Vespasian perceived that the
intervals there were between the works were of disadvantage to him;
for those spaces of ground afforded the Jews a place for assaulting the
Romans. So he united the hurdles, and at the same time joined one part
of the army to the other, which prevented the private excursions of the
Jews.

10. And when the bank was now raised, and brought nearer than ever to
the battlements that belonged to the walls, Josephus thought it would be
entirely wrong in him if he could make no contrivances in opposition
to theirs, and that might be for the city's preservation; so he got
together his workmen, and ordered them to build the wall higher; and
while they said that this was impossible to be done while so many darts
were thrown at them, he invented this sort of cover for them: He bid
them fix piles, and expand before them the raw hides of oxen newly
killed, that these hides by yielding and hollowing themselves when the
stones were thrown at them might receive them, for that the other darts
would slide off them, and the fire that was thrown would be quenched by
the moisture that was in them. And these he set before the workmen, and
under them these workmen went on with their works in safety, and raised
the wall higher, and that both by day and by night, till it was twenty
cubits high. He also built a good number of towers upon the wall, and
fitted it to strong battlements. This greatly discouraged the Romans,
who in their own opinions were already gotten within the walls, while
they were now at once astonished at Josephus's contrivance, and at the
fortitude of the citizens that were in the city.

11. And now Vespasian was plainly irritated at the great subtlety of
this stratagem, and at the boldness of the citizens of Jotapata; for
taking heart again upon the building of this wall, they made fresh
sallies upon the Romans, and had every day conflicts with them by
parties, together with all such contrivances, as robbers make use of,
and with the plundering of all that came to hand, as also with the
setting fire to all the other works; and this till Vespasian made his
army leave off fighting them, and resolved to lie round the city, and
to starve them into a surrender, as supposing that either they would
be forced to petition him for mercy by want of provisions, or if they
should have the courage to hold out till the last, they should perish
by famine: and he concluded he should conquer them the more easily in
fighting, if he gave them an interval, and then fell upon them when they
were weakened by famine; but still he gave orders that they should guard
against their coming out of the city.

12. Now the besieged had plenty of corn within the city, and indeed of
all necessaries, but they wanted water, because there was no fountain in
the city, the people being there usually satisfied with rain water; yet
is it a rare thing in that country to have rain in summer, and at
this season, during the siege, they were in great distress for some
contrivance to satisfy their thirst; and they were very sad at this time
particularly, as if they were already in want of water entirely, for
Josephus seeing that the city abounded with other necessaries, and that
the men were of good courage, and being desirous to protract the siege
to the Romans longer than they expected, ordered their drink to be given
them by measure; but this scanty distribution of water by measure was
deemed by them as a thing more hard upon them than the want of it;
and their not being able to drink as much as they would made them more
desirous of drinking than they otherwise had been; nay, they were as
much disheartened hereby as if they were come to the last degree of
thirst. Nor were the Romans unacquainted with the state they were in,
for when they stood over against them, beyond the wall, they could see
them running together, and taking their water by measure, which made
them throw their javelins thither the place being within their reach,
and kill a great many of them.

13. Hereupon Vespasian hoped that their receptacles of water would in
no long time be emptied, and that they would be forced to deliver up
the city to him; but Josephus being minded to break such his hope, gave
command that they should wet a great many of their clothes, and hang
them out about the battlements, till the entire wall was of a sudden all
wet with the running down of the water. At this sight the Romans were
discouraged, and under consternation, when they saw them able to throw
away in sport so much water, when they supposed them not to have enough
to drink themselves. This made the Roman general despair of taking the
city by their want of necessaries, and to betake himself again to arms,
and to try to force them to surrender, which was what the Jews greatly
desired; for as they despaired of either themselves or their city being
able to escape, they preferred a death in battle before one by hunger
and thirst.

14. However, Josephus contrived another stratagem besides the foregoing,
to get plenty of what they wanted. There was a certain rough and uneven
place that could hardly be ascended, and on that account was not guarded
by the soldiers; so Josephus sent out certain persons along the western
parts of the valley, and by them sent letters to whom he pleased of the
Jews that were out of the city, and procured from them what necessaries
soever they wanted in the city in abundance; he enjoined them also to
creep generally along by the watch as they came into the city, and to
cover their backs with such sheep-skins as had their wool upon them,
that if any one should spy them out in the night time, they might
be believed to be dogs. This was done till the watch perceived their
contrivance, and encompassed that rough place about themselves.

15. And now it was that Josephus perceived that the city could not hold
out long, and that his own life would be in doubt if he continued in it;
so he consulted how he and the most potent men of the city might fly
out of it. When the multitude understood this, they came all round about
him, and begged of him not to overlook them while they entirely depended
on him, and him alone; for that there was still hope of the city's
deliverance, if he would stay with them, because every body would
undertake any pains with great cheerfulness on his account, and in that
case there would be some comfort for them also, though they should be
taken: that it became him neither to fly from his enemies, nor to desert
his friends, nor to leap out of that city, as out of a ship that was
sinking in a storm, into which he came when it was quiet and in a calm;
for that by going away he would be the cause of drowning the city,
because nobody would then venture to oppose the enemy when he was once
gone, upon whom they wholly confided. 16. Hereupon Josephus avoided
letting them know that he was to go away to provide for his own safety,
but told them that he would go out of the city for their sakes; for that
if he staid with them, he should be able to do them little good while
they were in a safe condition; and that if they were once taken, he
should only perish with them to no purpose; but that if he were once
gotten free from this siege, he should be able to bring them very great
relief; for that he would then immediately get the Galileans together,
out of the country, in great multitudes, and draw the Romans off their
city by another war. That he did not see what advantage he could bring
to them now, by staying among them, but only provoke the Romans to
besiege them more closely, as esteeming it a most valuable thing to take
him; but that if they were once informed that he was fled out of the
city, they would greatly remit of their eagerness against it. Yet did
not this plea move the people, but inflamed them the more to hang about
him. Accordingly, both the children and the old men, and the women with
their infants, came mourning to him, and fell down before him, and all
of them caught hold of his feet, and held him fast, and besought him,
with great lamentations, that he would take his share with them in
their fortune; and I think they did this, not that they envied his
deliverance, but that they hoped for their own; for they could not think
they should suffer any great misfortune, provided Josephus would but
stay with them.

17. Now Josephus thought, that if he resolved to stay, it would be
ascribed to their entreaties; and if he resolved to go away by force, he
should be put into custody. His commiseration also of the people under
their lamentations had much broken that his eagerness to leave them; so
he resolved to stay, and arming himself with the common despair of
the citizens, he said to them, "Now is the time to begin to fight in
earnest, when there is no hope of deliverance left. It is a brave
thing to prefer glory before life, and to set about some such noble
undertaking as may be remembered by late posterity." Having said
this, he fell to work immediately, and made a sally, and dispersed the
enemies' out-guards, and ran as far as the Roman camp itself, and pulled
the coverings of their tents to pieces, that were upon their banks, and
set fire to their works. And this was the manner in which he never left
off fighting, neither the next day, nor the day after it, but went on
with it for a considerable number of both days and nights.

18. Upon this, Vespasian, when he saw the Romans distressed by these
sallies, [though they were ashamed to be made to run away by the Jews;
and when at any time they made the Jews run away, their heavy armor
would not let them pursue them far; while the Jews, when they had
performed any action, and before they could be hurt themselves, still
retired into the city,] ordered his armed men to avoid their onset,
and not fight it out with men under desperation, while nothing is more
courageous than despair; but that their violence would be quenched when
they saw they failed of their purposes, as fire is quenched when
it wants fuel; and that it was proper for the Romans to gain their
victories as cheap as they could, since they are not forced to fight,
but only to enlarge their own dominions. So he repelled the Jews in
great measure by the Arabian archers, and the Syrian slingers, and by
those that threw stones at them, nor was there any intermission of the
great number of their offensive engines. Now the Jews suffered greatly
by these engines, without being able to escape from them; and when these
engines threw their stones or javelins a great way, and the Jews were
within their reach, they pressed hard upon the Romans, and fought
desperately, without sparing either soul or body, one part succoring
another by turns, when it was tired down.

19. When, therefore, Vespasian looked upon himself as in a manner
besieged by these sallies of the Jews, and when his banks were now not
far from the walls, he determined to make use of his battering ram.
This battering ram is a vast beam of wood like the mast of a ship, its
forepart is armed with a thick piece of iron at the head of it, which
is so carved as to be like the head of a ram, whence its name is taken.
This ram is slung in the air by ropes passing over its middle, and is
hung like the balance in a pair of scales from another beam, and braced
by strong beams that pass on both sides of it, in the nature of a cross.
When this ram is pulled backward by a great number of men with united
force, and then thrust forward by the same men, with a mighty noise, it
batters the walls with that iron part which is prominent. Nor is there
any tower so strong, or walls so broad, that can resist any more than
its first batteries, but all are forced to yield to it at last. This was
the experiment which the Roman general betook himself to, when he was
eagerly bent upon taking the city; but found lying in the field so
long to be to his disadvantage, because the Jews would never let him be
quiet. So these Romans brought the several engines for galling an enemy
nearer to the walls, that they might reach such as were upon the wall,
and endeavored to frustrate their attempts; these threw stones and
javelins at them; in the like manner did the archers and slingers come
both together closer to the wall. This brought matters to such a pass
that none of the Jews durst mount the walls, and then it was that the
other Romans brought the battering ram that was cased with hurdles all
over, and in the tipper part was secured by skins that covered it, and
this both for the security of themselves and of the engine. Now, at the
very first stroke of this engine, the wall was shaken, and a terrible
clamor was raised by the people within the city, as if they were already
taken.

20. And now, when Josephus saw this ram still battering the same place,
and that the wall would quickly be thrown down by it, he resolved to
elude for a while the force of the engine. With this design he gave
orders to fill sacks with chaff, and to hang them down before that place
where they saw the ram always battering, that the stroke might be turned
aside, or that the place might feel less of the strokes by the yielding
nature of the chaff. This contrivance very much delayed the attempts
of the Romans, because, let them remove their engine to what part they
pleased, those that were above it removed their sacks, and placed them
over against the strokes it made, insomuch that the wall was no way
hurt, and this by diversion of the strokes, till the Romans made an
opposite contrivance of long poles, and by tying hooks at their ends,
cut off the sacks. Now when the battering ram thus recovered its force,
and the wall having been but newly built, was giving way, Josephus and
those about him had afterward immediate recourse to fire, to defend
themselves withal; whereupon they took what materials soever they had
that were but dry, and made a sally three ways, and set fire to the
machines, and the hurdles, and the banks of the Romans themselves; nor
did the Romans well know how to come to their assistance, being at once
under a consternation at the Jews' boldness, and being prevented by the
flames from coming to their assistance; for the materials being dry with
the bitumen and pitch that were among them, as was brimstone also, the
fire caught hold of every thing immediately, and what cost the Romans a
great deal of pains was in one hour consumed.

21. And here a certain Jew appeared worthy of our relation and
commendation; he was the son of Sameas, and was called Eleazar, and was
born at Saab, in Galilee. This man took up a stone of a vast bigness,
and threw it down from the wall upon the ram, and this with so great a
force, that it broke off the head of the engine. He also leaped down,
and took up the head of the ram from the midst of them, and without any
concern carried it to the top of the wall, and this while he stood as a
fit mark to be pelted by all his enemies. Accordingly, he received the
strokes upon his naked body, and was wounded with five darts; nor did he
mind any of them while he went up to the top of the wall, where he stood
in the sight of them all, as an instance of the greatest boldness; after
which he drew himself on a heap with his wounds upon him, and fell down
together with the head of the ram. Next to him, two brothers showed
their courage; their names were Netir and Philip, both of them of the
village Ruma, and both of them Galileans also; these men leaped upon the
soldiers of the tenth legion, and fell upon the Romans with such a noise
and force as to disorder their ranks, and to put to flight all upon
whomsoever they made their assaults.

22. After these men's performances, Josephus, and the rest of the
multitude with him, took a great deal of fire, and burnt both the
machines and their coverings, with the works belonging to the fifth and
to the tenth legion, which they put to flight; when others followed them
immediately, and buried those instruments and all their materials under
ground. However, about the evening, the Romans erected the battering ram
again, against that part of the wall which had suffered before; where a
certain Jew that defended the city from the Romans hit Vespasian with a
dart in his foot, and wounded him a little, the distance being so great,
that no mighty impression could be made by the dart thrown so far off.
However, this caused the greatest disorder among the Romans; for when
those who stood near him saw his blood, they were disturbed at it, and
a report went abroad, through the whole army, that the general was
wounded, while the greatest part left the siege, and came running
together with surprise and fear to the general; and before them all
came Titus, out of the concern he had for his father, insomuch that the
multitude were in great confusion, and this out of the regard they had
for their general, and by reason of the agony that the son was in. Yet
did the father soon put an end to the son's fear, and to the disorder
the army was under, for being superior to his pains, and endeavoring
soon to be seen by all that had been in a fright about him, he excited
them to fight the Jews more briskly; for now every body was willing to
expose himself to danger immediately, in order to avenge their general;
and then they encouraged one another with loud voices, and ran hastily
to the walls.

23. But still Josephus and those with him, although they fell down dead
one upon another by the darts and stones which the engines threw upon
them, yet did not they desert the wall, but fell upon those who managed
the ram, under the protection of the hurdles, with fire, and iron
weapons, and stones; and these could do little or nothing, but fell
themselves perpetually, while they were seen by those whom they could
not see, for the light of their own flame shone about them, and made
them a most visible mark to the enemy, as they were in the day time,
while the engines could not be seen at a great distance, and so what was
thrown at them was hard to be avoided; for the force with which these
engines threw stones and darts made them hurt several at a time, and the
violent noise of the stones that were cast by the engines was so great,
that they carried away the pinnacles of the wall, and broke off the
corners of the towers; for no body of men could be so strong as not to
be overthrown to the last rank by the largeness of the stones. And any
one may learn the force of the engines by what happened this very night;
for as one of those that stood round about Josephus was near the wall,
his head was carried away by such a stone, and his skull was flung as
far as three furlongs. In the day time also, a woman with child had her
belly so violently struck, as she was just come out of her house, that
the infant was carried to the distance of half a furlong, so great was
the force of that engine. The noise of the instruments themselves was
very terrible, the sound of the darts and stones that were thrown by
them was so also; of the same sort was that noise the dead bodies made,
when they were dashed against the wall; and indeed dreadful was the
clamor which these things raised in the women within the city, which was
echoed back at the same time by the cries of such as were slain; while
the whole space of ground whereon they fought ran with blood, and the
wall might have been ascended over by the bodies of the dead carcasses;
the mountains also contributed to increase the noise by their echoes;
nor was there on that night any thing of terror wanting that could
either affect the hearing or the sight: yet did a great part of those
that fought so hard for Jotapata fall manfully, as were a great part of
them wounded. However, the morning watch was come ere the wall yielded
to the machines employed against it, though it had been battered without
intermission. However, those within covered their bodies with their
armor, and raised works over against that part which was thrown down,
before those machines were laid by which the Romans were to ascend into
the city.

24. In the morning Vespasian got his army together, in order to take the
city [by storm], after a little recreation upon the hard pains they had
been at the night before; and as he was desirous to draw off those that
opposed him from the places where the wall had been thrown down, he made
the most courageous of the horsemen get off their horses, and placed
them in three ranks over against those ruins of the wall, but covered
with their armor on every side, and with poles in their hands, that
so these might begin their ascent as soon as the instruments for such
ascent were laid; behind them he placed the flower of the footmen; but
for the rest of the horse, he ordered them to extend themselves over
against the wall, upon the whole hilly country, in order to prevent any
from escaping out of the city when it should be taken; and behind these
he placed the archers round about, and commanded them to have their
darts ready to shoot. The same command he gave to the slingers, and to
those that managed the engines, and bid them to take up other ladders,
and have them ready to lay upon those parts of the wall which were yet
untouched, that the besieged might be engaged in trying to hinder their
ascent by them, and leave the guard of the parts that were thrown down,
while the rest of them should be overborne by the darts cast at them,
and might afford his men an entrance into the city.

25. But Josephus, understanding the meaning of Vespasian's contrivance,
set the old men, together with those that were tired out, at the sound
parts of the wall, as expecting no harm from those quarters, but set the
strongest of his men at the place where the wall was broken down, and
before them all six men by themselves, among whom he took his share
of the first and greatest danger. He also gave orders, that when the
legions made a shout, they should stop their ears, that they might not
be affrighted at it, and that, to avoid the multitude of the enemy's
darts, they should bend down on their knees, and cover themselves with
their shields, and that they should retreat a little backward for a
while, till the archers should have emptied their quivers; but that When
the Romans should lay their instruments for ascending the walls, they
should leap out on the sudden, and with their own instruments should
meet the enemy, and that every one should strive to do his best,
in order not to defend his own city, as if it were possible to be
preserved, but in order to revenge it, when it was already destroyed;
and that they should set before their eyes how their old men were to be
slain, and their children and wives were to be killed immediately by the
enemy; and that they would beforehand spend all their fury, on account
of the calamities just coming upon them, and pour it out on the actors.

26. And thus did Josephus dispose of both his bodies of men; but then
for the useless part of the citizens, the women and children, when they
saw their city encompassed by a threefold army, [for none of the usual
guards that had been fighting before were removed,] when they also saw,
not only the walls thrown down, but their enemies with swords in their
hands, as also the hilly country above them shining with their weapons,
and the darts in the hands of the Arabian archers, they made a final
and lamentable outcry of the destruction, as if the misery were not only
threatened, but actually come upon them already. But Josephus ordered
the women to be shut up in their houses, lest they should render the
warlike actions of the men too effeminate, by making them commiserate
their condition, and commanded them to hold their peace, and threatened
them if they did not, while he came himself before the breach, where his
allotment was; for all those who brought ladders to the other places,
he took no notice of them, but earnestly waited for the shower of arrows
that was coming.

27. And now the trumpetersAnd now the trumpeters of the several Roman legions sounded
together, and the army made a terrible shout; and the darts, as
by order, flew so fast, that they intercepted the light. However,
Josephus's men remembered the charges he had given them, they stopped
their ears at the sounds, and covered their bodies against the darts;
and as to the engines that were set ready to go to work, the Jews ran
out upon them, before those that should have used them were gotten
upon them. And now, on the ascending of the soldiers, there was a great
conflict, and many actions of the hands and of the soul were exhibited;
while the Jews did earnestly endeavor, in the extreme danger they were
in, not to show less courage than those who, without being in danger,
fought so stoutly against them; nor did they leave struggling with
the Romans till they either fell down dead themselves, or killed
their antagonists. But the Jews grew weary with defending themselves
continually, and had not enough to come in their places, and succor
them; while, on the side of the Romans, fresh men still succeeded
those that were tired; and still new men soon got upon the machines for
ascent, in the room of those that were thrust down; those encouraging
one another, and joining side to side with their shields, which were a
protection to them, they became a body of men not to be broken; and as
this band thrust away the Jews, as though they were themselves but one
body, they began already to get upon the wall.

28. Then did Josephus take necessity for his counselor in this utmost
distress, [which necessity is very sagacious in invention when it is
irritated by despair,] and gave orders to pour scalding oil upon those
whose shields protected them. Whereupon they soon got it ready, being
many that brought it, and what they brought being a great quantity also,
and poured it on all sides upon the Romans, and threw down upon them
their vessels as they were still hissing from the heat of the fire: this
so burnt the Romans, that it dispersed that united band, who now tumbled
clown from the wall with horrid pains, for the oil did easily run down
the whole body from head to foot, under their entire armor, and fed upon
their flesh like flame itself, its fat and unctuous nature rendering it
soon heated and slowly cooled; and as the men were cooped up in their
head-pieces and breastplates, they could no way get free from this
burning oil; they could only leap and roll about in their pains, as they
fell down from the bridges they had laid. And as they thus were beaten
back, and retired to their own party, who still pressed them forward,
they were easily wounded by those that were behind them.

29. However, in this ill success of the Romans, their courage did
not fail them, nor did the Jews want prudence to oppose them; for the
Romans, although they saw their own men thrown down, and in a miserable
condition, yet were they vehemently bent against those that poured
the oil upon them; while every one reproached the man before him as a
coward, and one that hindered him from exerting himself; and while the
Jews made use of another stratagem to prevent their ascent, and poured
boiling fenugreek upon the boards, in order to make them slip and fall
down; by which means neither could those that were coming up, nor
those that were going down, stand on their feet; but some of them fell
backward upon the machines on which they ascended, and were trodden
upon; many of them fell down upon the bank they had raised, and when
they were fallen upon it were slain by the Jews; for when the Romans
could not keep their feet, the Jews being freed from fighting hand to
hand, had leisure to throw their darts at them. So the general called
off those soldiers in the evening that had suffered so sorely, of whom
the number of the slain was not a few, while that of the wounded was
still greater; but of the people of Jotapata no more than six men were
killed, although more than three hundred were carried off wounded. This
fight happened on the twentieth day of the month Desius [Sivan]. 30.
Hereupon Vespasian comforted his army on occasion of what happened, and
as he found them angry indeed, but rather wanting somewhat to do than
any further exhortations, he gave orders to raise the banks still
higher, and to erect three towers, each fifty feet high, and that they
should cover them with plates of iron on every side, that they might
be both firm by their weight, and not easily liable to be set on fire.
These towers he set upon the banks, and placed upon them such as could
shoot darts and arrows, with the lighter engines for throwing stones and
darts also; and besides these, he set upon them the stoutest men among
the slingers, who not being to be seen by reason of the height they
stood upon, and the battlements that protected them, might throw their
weapons at those that were upon the wall, and were easily seen by them.
Hereupon the Jews, not being easily able to escape those darts that were
thrown down upon their heads, nor to avenge themselves on those whom
they could not see, and perceiving that the height of the towers was so
great, that a dart which they threw with their hand could hardly reach
it, and that the iron plates about them made it very hard to come at
them by fire, they ran away from the walls, and fled hastily out of the
city, and fell upon those that shot at them. And thus did the people of
Jotapata resist the Romans, while a great number of them were every day
killed, without their being able to retort the evil upon their enemies;
nor could they keep them out of the city without danger to themselves.

31. About this time it was that Vespasian sent out Trajan against a city
called Japha, that lay near to Jotapata, and that desired innovations,
and was puffed up with the unexpected length of the opposition of
Jotapata. This Trajan was the commander of the tenth legion, and to him
Vespasian committed one thousand horsemen, and two thousand footmen.
When Trajan came to the city, he found it hard to be taken, for besides
the natural strength of its situation, it was also secured by a double
wall; but when he saw the people of this city coming out of it, and
ready to fight him, he joined battle with them, and after a short
resistance which they made, he pursued after them; and as they fled to
their first wall, the Romans followed them so closely, that they fell
in together with them: but when the Jews were endeavoring to get again
within their second wall, their fellow citizens shut them out, as being
afraid that the Romans would force themselves in with them. It was
certainly God therefore who brought the Romans to punish the Galileans,
and did then expose the people of the city every one of them manifestly
to be destroyed by their bloody enemies; for they fell upon the gates in
great crowds, and earnestly calling to those that kept them, and that
by their names also, yet had they their throats cut in the very midst of
their supplications; for the enemy shut the gates of the first wall, and
their own citizens shut the gates of the second, so they were enclosed
between two walls, and were slain in great numbers together; many of
them were run through by swords of their own men, and many by their own
swords, besides an immense number that were slain by the Romans. Nor
had they any courage to revenge themselves; for there was added to the
consternation they were in from the enemy, their being betrayed by their
own friends, which quite broke their spirits; and at last they died,
cursing not the Romans, but their own citizens, till they were all
destroyed, being in number twelve thousand. So Trajan gathered that the
city was empty of people that could fight, and although there should a
few of them be therein, he supposed that they would be too timorous to
venture upon any opposition; so he reserved the taking of the city to
the general. Accordingly, he sent messengers to Vespasian, and desired
him to send his son Titus to finish the victory he had gained. Vespasian
hereupon imagining there might be some pains still necessary, sent his
son with an army of five hundred horsemen, and one thousand footmen. So
he came quickly to the city, and put his army in order, and set Trajan
over the left wing, while he had the right himself, and led them to the
siege: and when the soldiers brought ladders to be laid against the wall
on every side, the Galileans opposed them from above for a while; but
soon afterward they left the walls. Then did Titus's men leap into the
city, and seized upon it presently; but when those that were in it were
gotten together, there was a fierce battle between them; for the men of
power fell upon the Romans in the narrow streets, and the women threw
whatsoever came next to hand at them, and sustained a fight with them
for six hours' time; but when the fighting men were spent, the rest of
the multitude had their throats cut, partly in the open air, and partly
in their own houses, both young and old together. So there were no males
now remaining, besides infants, which, with the women, were carried as
slaves into captivity; so that the number of the slain, both now in the
city and at the former fight, was fifteen thousand, and the captives
were two thousand one hundred and thirty. This calamity befell the
Galileans on the twenty-fifth day of the month Desius [Sivan.] 32. Nor
did the Samaritans escape their share of misfortunes at this time; for
they assembled themselves together upon the mountain called Gerizzim,
which is with them a holy mountain, and there they remained; which
collection of theirs, as well as the courageous minds they showed, could
not but threaten somewhat of war; nor were they rendered wiser by
the miseries that had come upon their neighboring cities. They also,
notwithstanding the great success the Romans had, marched on in an
unreasonable manner, depending on their own weakness, and were disposed
for any tumult upon its first appearance. Vespasian therefore thought
it best to prevent their motions, and to cut off the foundation of their
attempts. For although all Samaria had ever garrisons settled among
them, yet did the number of those that were come to Mount Gerizzim, and
their conspiracy together, give ground for fear what they would be at;
he therefore sent thither Cerealis, the commander of the fifth legion,
with six hundred horsemen, and three thousand footmen, who did not think
it safe to go up to the mountain, and give them battle, because many of
the enemy were on the higher part of the ground; so he encompassed all
the lower part of the mountain with his army, and watched them all that
day. Now it happened that the Samaritans, who were now destitute of
water, were inflamed with a violent heat, [for it was summer time, and
the multitude had not provided themselves with necessaries,] insomuch
that some of them died that very day with heat, while others of them
preferred slavery before such a death as that was, and fled to the
Romans; by whom Cerealis understood that those which still staid
there were very much broken by their misfortunes. So he went up to the
mountain, and having placed his forces round about the enemy, he, in the
first place, exhorted them to take the security of his right hand, and
come to terms with him, and thereby save themselves; and assured them,
that if they would lay down their arms, he would secure them from any
harm; but when he could not prevail with them, he fell upon them and
slew them all, being in number eleven thousand and six hundred. This was
done on the twenty-seventh day of the month Desius [Sivan]. And these
were the calamities that befell the Samaritans at this time.

33. But as the people of Jotapata still held out manfully, and bore
up under their miseries beyond all that could be hoped for, on the
forty-seventh day [of the siege] the banks cast up by the Romans were
become higher than the wall; on which day a certain deserter went to
Vespasian, and told him how few were left in the city, and how weak they
were, and that they had been so worn out with perpetual watching, and as
perpetual fighting, that they could not now oppose any force that came
against them, and that they might be taken by stratagem, if any one
would attack them; for that about the last watch of the night, when they
thought they might have some rest from the hardships they were under,
and when a morning sleep used to come upon them, as they were thoroughly
weary, he said the watch used to fall asleep; accordingly his advice
was, that they should make their attack at that hour. But Vespasian had
a suspicion about this deserter, as knowing how faithful the Jews were
to one another, and how much they despised any punishments that could be
inflicted on them; this last because one of the people of Jotapata had
undergone all sorts of torments, and though they made him pass through a
fiery trial of his enemies in his examination, yet would he inform them
nothing of the affairs within the city, and as he was crucified, smiled
at them. However, the probability there was in the relation itself
did partly confirm the truth of what the deserter told them, and they
thought he might probably speak truth. However, Vespasian thought they
should be no great sufferers if the report was a sham; so he commanded
them to keep the man in custody, and prepared the army for taking the
city.

34. According to which resolution they marched without noise, at the
hour that had been told them, to the wall; and it was Titus himself that
first got upon it, with one of his tribunes, Domitius Sabinus, and had
a few of the fifteenth legion along with him. So they cut the throats of
the watch, and entered the city very quietly. After these came Cerealis
the tribune, and Placidus, and led on those that were tinder them. Now
when the citadel was taken, and the enemy were in the very midst of the
city, and when it was already day, yet was not the taking of the city
known by those that held it; for a great many of them were fast asleep,
and a great mist, which then by chance fell upon the city, hindered
those that got up from distinctly seeing the case they were in, till the
whole Roman army was gotten in, and they were raised up only to find the
miseries they were under; and as they were slaying, they perceived the
city was taken. And for the Romans, they so well remembered what they
had suffered during the siege, that they spared none, nor pitied any,
but drove the people down the precipice from the citadel, and slew them
as they drove them down; at which time the difficulties of the place
hindered those that were still able to fight from defending themselves;
for as they were distressed in the narrow streets, and could not keep
their feet sure along the precipice, they were overpowered with the
crowd of those that came fighting them down from the citadel. This
provoked a great many, even of those chosen men that were about
Josephus, to kill themselves with their own hands; for when they saw
that they could kill none of the Romans, they resolved to prevent being
killed by the Romans, and got together in great numbers in the utmost
parts of the city, and killed themselves.

35. However, such of the watch as at the first perceived they were
taken, and ran away as fast as they could, went up into one of
the towers on the north side of the city, and for a while defended
themselves there; but as they were encompassed with a multitude of
enemies, they tried to use their right hands when it was too late, and
at length they cheerfully offered their necks to be cut off by those
that stood over them. And the Romans might have boasted that the
conclusion of that siege was without blood [on their side] if there had
not been a centurion, Antonius, who was slain at the taking of the city.
His death was occasioned by the following treachery; for there was one
of those that were fled into the caverns, which were a great number,
who desired that this Antonius would reach him his right hand for his
security, and would assure him that he would preserve him, and give
him his assistance in getting up out of the cavern; accordingly, he
incautiously reached him his right hand, when the other man prevented
him, and stabbed him under his loins with a spear, and killed him
immediately.

36. And on this day it was that the Romans slew all the multitude
that appeared openly; but on the following days they searched the
hiding-places, and fell upon those that were under ground, and in the
caverns, and went thus through every age, excepting the infants and
the women, and of these there were gathered together as captives twelve
hundred; and as for those that were slain at the taking of the city,
and in the former fights, they were numbered to be forty thousand. So
Vespasian gave order that the city should be entirely demolished, and
all the fortifications burnt down. And thus was Jotapata taken, in the
thirteenth year of the reign of Nero, on the first day of the month
Panemus [Tamuz].






CHAPTER 8.


     How Josephus Was Discovered By A Woman, And Was Willing To
     Deliver Himself Up To The Romans; And What Discourse He Had
     With His Own Men, When They Endeavored To Hinder Him; And
     What He Said To Vespasian, When He Was Brought To Him; And
     After What Manner Vespasian Used Him Afterward.

1. And now the Romans searched for Josephus, both out of the hatred they
bore him, and because their general was very desirous to have him taken;
for he reckoned that if he were once taken, the greatest part of the war
would be over. They then searched among the dead, and looked into the
most concealed recesses of the city; but as the city was first taken,
he was assisted by a certain supernatural providence; for he withdrew
himself from the enemy when he was in the midst of them, and leaped into
a certain deep pit, whereto there adjoined a large den at one side of
it, which den could not be seen by those that were above ground;
and there he met with forty persons of eminency that had concealed
themselves, and with provisions enough to satisfy them for not a few
days. So in the day time he hid himself from the enemy, who had seized
upon all places, and in the night time he got up out of the den and
looked about for some way of escaping, and took exact notice of the
watch; but as all places were guarded every where on his account, that
there was no way of getting off unseen, he went down again into the den.
Thus he concealed himself two days; but on the third day, when they
had taken a woman who had been with them, he was discovered. Whereupon
Vespasian sent immediately and zealously two tribunes, Paulinus and
Gallicanus, and ordered them to give Josephus their right hands as a
security for his life, and to exhort him to come up.

2. So they came and invited the man to come up, and gave him assurances
that his life should be preserved: but they did not prevail with him;
for he gathered suspicions from the probability there was that one who
had done so many things against the Romans must suffer for it, though
not from the mild temper of those that invited him. However, he was
afraid that he was invited to come up in order to be punished, until
Vespasian sent besides these a third tribune, Nicanor, to him; he
was one that was well known to Josephus, and had been his familiar
acquaintance in old time. When he was come, he enlarged upon the natural
mildness of the Romans towards those they have once conquered; and told
him that he had behaved himself so valiantly, that the commanders rather
admired than hated him; that the general was very desirous to have him
brought to him, not in order to punish him, for that he could do though
he should not come voluntarily, but that he was determined to preserve a
man of his courage. He moreover added this, that Vespasian, had he been
resolved to impose upon him, would not have sent to him a friend of his
own, nor put the fairest color upon the vilest action, by pretending
friendship and meaning perfidiousness; nor would he have himself
acquiesced, or come to him, had it been to deceive him.

3. Now as Josephus began to hesitate with himself about Nicanor's
proposal, the soldiery were so angry, that they ran hastily to set fire
to the den; but the tribune would not permit them so to do, as being
very desirous to take the man alive. And now, as Nicanor lay hard at
Josephus to comply, and he understood how the multitude of the enemies
threatened him, he called to mind the dreams which he had dreamed in the
night time, whereby God had signified to him beforehand both the
future calamities of the Jews, and the events that concerned the Roman
emperors. Now Josephus was able to give shrewd conjectures about the
interpretation of such dreams as have been ambiguously delivered by God.
Moreover, he was not unacquainted with the prophecies contained in
the sacred books, as being a priest himself, and of the posterity of
priests: and just then was he in an ecstasy; and setting before him the
tremendous images of the dreams he had lately had, he put up a secret
prayer to God, and said, "Since it pleaseth thee, who hast created the
Jewish nation, to depress the same, and since all their good fortune is
gone over to the Romans, and since thou hast made choice of this soul
of mine to foretell what is to come to pass hereafter, I willingly give
them my hands, and am content to live. And I protest openly that I do
not go over to the Romans as a deserter of the Jews, but as a minister
from thee."

4. When he had said this, he complied with Nicanor's invitation. But
when those Jews who had fled with him understood that he yielded to
those that invited him to come up, they came about him in a body, and
cried out, "Nay, indeed, now may the laws of our forefathers, which
God ordained himself, well groan to purpose; that God we mean who hath
created the souls of the Jews of such a temper, that they despise death.
O Josephus! art thou still fond of life? and canst thou bear to see the
light in a state of slavery? How soon hast thou forgotten thyself! How
many hast thou persuaded to lose their lives for liberty! Thou
hast therefore had a false reputation for manhood, and a like false
reputation for wisdom, if thou canst hope for preservation from those
against whom thou hast fought so zealously, and art however willing
to be preserved by them, if they be in earnest. But although the good
fortune of the Romans hath made thee forget thyself, we ought to take
care that the glory of our forefathers may not be tarnished. We will
lend thee our right hand and a sword; and if thou wilt die willingly,
thou wilt die as general of the Jews; but if unwillingly, thou wilt die
as a traitor to them." As soon as they said this, they began to thrust
their swords at him, and threatened they would kill him, if he thought
of yielding himself to the Romans.

5. Upon this Josephus was afraid of their attacking him, and yet thought
he should be a betrayer of the commands of God, if he died before they
were delivered. So he began to talk like a philosopher to them in the
distress he was then in, when he said thus to them: "O my friends, why
are we so earnest to kill ourselves? and why do we set our soul and
body, which are such dear companions, at such variance? Can any one
pretend that I am not the man I was formerly? Nay, the Romans are
sensible how that matter stands well enough. It is a brave thing to die
in war; but so that it be according to the law of war, by the hand of
conquerors. If, therefore, I avoid death from the sword of the Romans,
I am truly worthy to be killed by my own sword, and my own hand; but if
they admit of mercy, and would spare their enemy, how much more ought
we to have mercy upon ourselves, and to spare ourselves? For it is
certainly a foolish thing to do that to ourselves which we quarrel with
them for doing to us. I confess freely that it is a brave thing to die
for liberty; but still so that it be in war, and done by those who take
that liberty from us; but in the present case our enemies do neither
meet us in battle, nor do they kill us. Now he is equally a coward who
will not die when he is obliged to die, and he who will die when he is
not obliged so to do. What are we afraid of, when we will not go up
to the Romans? Is it death? If so, what we are afraid of, when we
but suspect our enemies will inflict it on us, shall we inflict it on
ourselves for certain? But it may be said we must be slaves. And are we
then in a clear state of liberty at present? It may also be said that
it is a manly act for one to kill himself. No, certainly, but a most
unmanly one; as I should esteem that pilot to be an arrant coward, who,
out of fear of a storm, should sink his ship of his own accord. Now
self-murder is a crime most remote from the common nature of all
animals, and an instance of impiety against God our Creator; nor indeed
is there any animal that dies by its own contrivance, or by its own
means, for the desire of life is a law engraven in them all; on which
account we deem those that openly take it away from us to be our
enemies, and those that do it by treachery are punished for so doing.
And do not you think that God is very angry when a man does injury to
what he hath bestowed on him? For from him it is that we have received
our being, and we ought to leave it to his disposal to take that being
away from us. The bodies of all men are indeed mortal, and are created
out of corruptible matter; but the soul is ever immortal, and is a
portion of the divinity that inhabits our bodies. Besides, if any one
destroys or abuses a depositum he hath received from a mere man, he is
esteemed a wicked and perfidious person; but then if any one cast out
of his body this Divine depositum, can we imagine that he who is thereby
affronted does not know of it? Moreover, our law justly ordains that
slaves which run away from their master shall be punished, though the
masters they run away from may have been wicked masters to them. And
shall we endeavor to run away from God, who is the best of all masters,
and not guilty of impeity? Do not you know that those who depart out of
this life according to the law of nature, and pay that debt which was
received from God, when he that lent it us is pleased to require it back
again, enjoy eternal fame; that their houses and their posterity are
sure, that their souls are pure and obedient, and obtain a most holy
place in heaven, from whence, in the revolutions of ages, they are again
sent into pure bodies; while the souls of those whose hands have acted
madly against themselves are received by the darkest place in Hades,
and while God, who is their Father, punishes those that offend against
either of them in their posterity? for which reason God hates such
doings, and the crime is punished by our most wise legislator.
Accordingly, our laws determine that the bodies of such as kill
themselves should be exposed till the sun be set, without burial,
although at the same time it be allowed by them to be lawful to bury our
enemies [sooner]. The laws of other nations also enjoin such men's
hands to be cut off when they are dead, which had been made use of in
destroying themselves when alive, while they reckoned that as the
body is alien from the soul, so is the hand alien from the body. It is
therefore, my friends, a right thing to reason justly, and not add to
the calamities which men bring upon us impiety towards our Creator. If
we have a mind to preserve ourselves, let us do it; for to be preserved
by those our enemies, to whom we have given so many demonstrations of
our courage, is no way inglorious; but if we have a mind to die, it is
good to die by the hand of those that have conquered us. For my part, I
will not run over to our enemies' quarters, in order to be a traitor to
myself; for certainly I should then be much more foolish than those that
deserted to the enemy, since they did it in order to save themselves,
and I should do it for destruction, for my own destruction. However, I
heartily wish the Romans may prove treacherous in this matter; for if,
after their offer of their right hand for security, I be slain by
them, I shall die cheerfully, and carry away with me the sense of their
perfidiousness, as a consolation greater than victory itself."

6. Now these and many the like motives did Josephus use to these men to
prevent their murdering themselves; but desperation had shut their ears,
as having long ago devoted themselves to die, and they were irritated at
Josephus. They then ran upon him with their swords in their hands, one
from one quarter, and another from another, and called him a coward, and
everyone of them appeared openly as if he were ready to smite him;
but he calling to one of them by name, and looking like a general to
another, and taking a third by the hand, and making a fourth ashamed
of himself, by praying him to forbear, and being in this condition
distracted with various passions, [as he well might in the great
distress he was then in,] he kept off every one of their swords
from killing him, and was forced to do like such wild beasts as are
encompassed about on every side, who always turn themselves against
those that last touched them. Nay, some of their right hands were
debilitated by the reverence they bare to their general in these his
fatal calamities, and their swords dropped out of their hands; and not
a few of them there were, who, when they aimed to smite him with their
swords, they were not thoroughly either willing or able to do it.

7. However, in this extreme distress, he was not destitute of his usual
sagacity; but trusting himself to the providence of God, he put his life
into hazard [in the manner following]: "And now," said he, "since it is
resolved among you that you will die, come on, let us commit our mutual
deaths to determination by lot. He whom the lot falls to first, let him
be killed by him that hath the second lot, and thus fortune shall make
its progress through us all; nor shall any of us perish by his own right
hand, for it would be unfair if, when the rest are gone, somebody should
repent and save himself." This proposal appeared to them to be very
just; and when he had prevailed with them to determine this matter by
lots, he drew one of the lots for himself also. He who had the first
lot laid his neck bare to him that had the next, as supposing that the
general would die among them immediately; for they thought death, if
Josephus might but die with them, was sweeter than life; yet was he with
another left to the last, whether we must say it happened so by chance,
or whether by the providence of God. And as he was very desirous neither
to be condemned by the lot, nor, if he had been left to the last, to
imbrue his right hand in the blood of his countrymen, he persuaded him
to trust his fidelity to him, and to live as well as himself.

8. Thus Josephus escaped in the war with the Romans, and in this his own
war with his friends, and was led by Nicanor to Vespasian. But now all
the Romans ran together to see him; and as the multitude pressed one
upon another about their general, there was a tumult of a various kind;
while some rejoiced that Josephus was taken, and some threatened him,
and some crowded to see him very near; but those that were more remote
cried out to have this their enemy put to death, while those that were
near called to mind the actions he had done, and a deep concern
appeared at the change of his fortune. Nor were there any of the Roman
commanders, how much soever they had been enraged at him before, but
relented when they came to the sight of him. Above all the rest, Titus's
own valor, and Josephus's own patience under his afflictions, made him
pity him, as did also the commiseration of his age, when he recalled
to mind that but a little while ago he was fighting, but lay now in the
hands of his enemies, which made him consider the power of fortune,
and how quick is the turn of affairs in war, and how no state of men is
sure; for which reason he then made a great many more to be of the same
pitiful temper with himself, and induced them to commiserate Josephus.
He was also of great weight in persuading his father to preserve him.
However, Vespasian gave strict orders that he should be kept with great
caution, as though he would in a very little time send him to Nero. 5

9. When Josephus heard him give those orders, he said that he had
somewhat in his mind that he would willingly say to himself alone. When
therefore they were all ordered to withdraw, excepting Titus and two of
their friends, he said, "Thou, O Vespasian, thinkest no more than
that thou hast taken Josephus himself captive; but I come to thee as a
messenger of greater tidings; for had not I been sent by God to thee,
I knew what was the law of the Jews in this case? and how it becomes
generals to die. Dost thou send me to Nero? For why? Are Nero's
successors till they come to thee still alive? Thou, O Vespasian, art
Caesar and emperor, thou, and this thy son. Bind me now still faster,
and keep me for thyself, for thou, O Caesar, are not only lord over me,
but over the land and the sea, and all mankind; and certainly I deserve
to be kept in closer custody than I now am in, in order to be punished,
if I rashly affirm any thing of God." When he had said this, Vespasian
at present did not believe him, but supposed that Josephus said this as
a cunning trick, in order to his own preservation; but in a little time
he was convinced, and believed what he said to be true, God himself
erecting his expectations, so as to think of obtaining the empire, and
by other signs fore-showing his advancement. He also found Josephus to
have spoken truth on other occasions; for one of those friends that were
present at that secret conference said to Josephus, "I cannot but wonder
how thou couldst not foretell to the people of Jotapata that they should
be taken, nor couldst foretell this captivity which hath happened to
thyself, unless what thou now sayest be a vain thing, in order to avoid
the rage that is risen against thyself." To which Josephus replied, "I
did foretell to the people of Jotapata that they would be taken on the
forty-seventh day, and that I should be caught alive by the Romans."
Now when Vespasian had inquired of the captives privately about these
predictions, he found them to be true, and then he began to believe
those that concerned himself. Yet did he not set Josephus at liberty
from his hands, but bestowed on him suits of clothes, and other precious
gifts; he treated him also in a very obliging manner, and continued so
to do, Titus still joining his interest in the honors that were done
him.






CHAPTER 9.


     How Joppa Was Taken, And Tiberias Delivered Up.

1. Now Vespasian returned to Ptolemais on the fourth day of the month
Panemus, [Tamus] and from thence he came to Cesarea, which lay by the
sea-side. This was a very great city of Judea, and for the greatest part
inhabited by Greeks: the citizens here received both the Roman army and
its general, with all sorts of acclamations and rejoicings, and this
partly out of the good-will they bore to the Romans, but principally out
of the hatred they bore to those that were conquered by them; on which
account they came clamoring against Josephus in crowds, and desired
he might be put to death. But Vespasian passed over this petition
concerning him, as offered by the injudicious multitude, with a bare
silence. Two of the legions also he placed at Cesarea, that they might
there take their winter-quarters, as perceiving the city very fit for
such a purpose; but he placed the tenth and the fifth at Scythopolis,
that he might not distress Cesarea with the entire army. This place was
warm even in winter, as it was suffocating hot in the summer time, by
reason of its situation in a plain, and near to the sea [of Galilee].

2. In the mean time, there were gathered together as well such as had
seditiously got out from among their enemies, as those that had escaped
out of the demolished cities, which were in all a great number, and
repaired Joppa, which had been left desolate by Cestius, that it might
serve them for a place of refuge; and because the adjoining region had
been laid waste in the war, and was not capable of supporting them, they
determined to go off to sea. They also built themselves a great many
piratical ships, and turned pirates upon the seas near to Syria, and
Phoenicia, and Egypt, and made those seas unnavigable to all men. Now
as soon as Vespasian knew of their conspiracy, he sent both footmen and
horsemen to Joppa, which was unguarded in the night time; however, those
that were in it perceived that they should be attacked, and were afraid
of it; yet did they not endeavor to keep the Romans out, but fled to
their ships, and lay at sea all night, out of the reach of their darts.

3. Now Joppa is not naturally a haven, for it ends in a rough shore,
where all the rest of it is straight, but the two ends bend towards each
other, where there are deep precipices, and great stones that jut out
into the sea, and where the chains wherewith Andromeda was bound have
left their footsteps, which attest to the antiquity of that fable. But
the north wind opposes and beats upon the shore, and dashes mighty
waves against the rocks which receive them, and renders the haven more
dangerous than the country they had deserted. Now as those people of
Joppa were floating about in this sea, in the morning there fell a
violent wind upon them; it is called by those that sail there "the
black north wind," and there dashed their ships one against another,
and dashed some of them against the rocks, and carried many of them by
force, while they strove against the opposite waves, into the main sea;
for the shore was so rocky, and had so many of the enemy upon it, that
they were afraid to come to land; nay, the waves rose so very high, that
they drowned them; nor was there any place whither they could fly, nor
any way to save themselves; while they were thrust out of the sea, by
the violence of the wind, if they staid where they were, and out of the
city by the violence of the Romans. And much lamentation there was when
the ships were dashed against one another, and a terrible noise when
they were broken to pieces; and some of the multitude that were in
them were covered with waves, and so perished, and a great many were
embarrassed with shipwrecks. But some of them thought that to die
by their own swords was lighter than by the sea, and so they killed
themselves before they were drowned; although the greatest part of them
were carried by the waves, and dashed to pieces against the abrupt
parts of the rocks, insomuch that the sea was bloody a long way, and the
maritime parts were full of dead bodies; for the Romans came upon those
that were carried to the shore, and destroyed them; and the number of
the bodies that were thus thrown out of the sea was four thousand and
two hundred. The Romans also took the city without opposition, and
utterly demolished it.

4. And thus was Joppa taken twice by the Romans in a little time; but
Vespasian, in order to prevent these pirates from coming thither any
more, erected a camp there, where the citadel of Joppa had been, and
left a body of horse in it, with a few footmen, that these last might
stay there and guard the camp, and the horsemen might spoil the country
that lay round it, and might destroy the neighboring villages and
smaller cities. So these troops overran the country, as they were
ordered to do, and every day cut to pieces and laid desolate the whole
region.

5. But now, when the fate of Jotapata was related at Jerusalem, a great
many at the first disbelieved it, on account of the vastness of the
calamity, and because they had no eye-witness to attest the truth
of what was related about it; for not one person was saved to be a
messenger of that news, but a fame was spread abroad at random that the
city was taken, as such fame usually spreads bad news about. However,
the truth was known by degrees, from the places near Jotapata, and
appeared to all to be too true. Yet were there fictitious stories added
to what was really done; for it was reported that Josephus was slain
at the taking of the city, which piece of news filled Jerusalem full of
sorrow. In every house also, and among all to whom any of the slain
were allied, there was a lamentation for them; but the mourning for the
commander was a public one; and some mourned for those that had lived
with them, others for their kindred, others for their friends, and
others for their brethren, but all mourned for Josephus; insomuch that
the lamentation did not cease in the city before the thirtieth day;
and a great many hired mourners, with their pipes, who should begin the
melancholy ditties for them.

6. But as the truth came out in time, it appeared how the affairs of
Jotapata really stood; yet was it found that the death of Josephus was
a fiction; and when they understood that he was alive, and was among the
Romans, and that the commanders treated him at another rate than they
treated captives, they were as vehemently angry at him now as they had
showed their good-will before, when he appeared to have been dead. He
was also abused by some as having been a coward, and by others as a
deserter; and the city was full of indignation at him, and of reproaches
cast upon him; their rage was also aggravated by their afflictions, and
more inflamed by their ill success; and what usually becomes an occasion
of caution to wise men, I mean affliction, became a spur to them to
venture on further calamities, and the end of one misery became still
the beginning of another; they therefore resolved to fall on the Romans
the more vehemently, as resolving to be revenged on him in revenging
themselves on the Romans. And this was the state of Jerusalem as to the
troubles which now came upon it.

7. But Vespasian, in order to see the kingdom of Agrippa, while the king
persuaded himself so to do, [partly in order to his treating the general
and his army in the best and most splendid manner his private affairs
would enable him to do, and partly that he might, by their means,
correct such things as were amiss in his government,] he removed from
that Cesarea which was by the sea-side, and went to that which is called
Cesarea Philippi 6 and there he refreshed his army for twenty days,
and was himself feasted by king Agrippa, where he also returned public
thanks to God for the good success he had had in his undertakings. But
as soon as he was informed that Tiberias was fond of innovations, and
that Taricheae had revolted, both which cities were parts of the kingdom
of Agrippa, and was satisfied within himself that the Jews were every
where perverted [from their obedience to their governors], he thought it
seasonable to make an expedition against these cities, and that for the
sake of Agrippa, and in order to bring his cities to reason. So he sent
away his son Titus to [the other] Cesarea, that he might bring the army
that lay there to Seythopous, which is the largest city of Decapolis,
and in the neighborhood of Tiberias, whither he came, and where he
waited for his son. He then came with three legions, and pitched his
camp thirty furlongs off Tiberias, at a certain station easily seen
by the innovators; it is named Sennabris. He also sent Valerian, a
decurion, with fifty horsemen, to speak peaceably to those that were in
the city, and to exhort them to give him assurances of their fidelity;
for he had heard that the people were desirous of peace, but were
obliged by some of the seditious part to join with them, and so were
forced to fight for them. When Valerian had marched up to the place, and
was near the wall, he alighted off his horse, and made those that were
with him to do the same, that they might not be thought to come to
skirmish with them; but before they could come to a discourse one with
another, the most potent men among the seditious made a sally upon them
armed; their leader was one whose name was Jesus, the son of Shaphat,
the principal head of a band of robbers. Now Valerian, neither thinking
it safe to fight contrary to the commands of the general, though he
were secure of a victory, and knowing that it was a very hazardous
undertaking for a few to fight with many, for those that were unprovided
to fight those that were ready, and being on other accounts surprised at
this unexpected onset of the Jews, he ran away on foot, as did five of
the rest in like manner, and left their horses behind them; which horses
Jesus led away into the city, and rejoiced as if they had taken them in
battle, and not by treachery.

8. Now the seniors of the people, and such as were of principal
authority among them, fearing what would be the issue of this matter,
fled to the camp of the Romans; they then took their king along with
them, and fell down before Vespasian, to supplicate his favor, and
besought him not to overlook them, nor to impute the madness of a few to
the whole city, to spare a people that have been ever civil and
obliging to the Romans; but to bring the authors of this revolt to due
punishment, who had hitherto so watched them, that though they were
zealous to give them the security of their right hands of a long time,
yet could they not accomplish the same. With these supplications the
general complied, although he were very angry at the whole city about
the carrying off his horses, and this because he saw that Agrippa
was under a great concern for them. So when Vespasian and Agrippa had
accepted of their right hands by way of security, Jesus and his party
thought it not safe for them to continue at Tiberias, so they ran
away to Taricheae. The next day Vespasian sent Trajan before with some
horsemen to the citadel, to make trial of the multitude, whether they
were all disposed for peace; and as soon as he knew that the people were
of the same mind with the petitioner, he took his army, and went to the
city; upon which the citizens opened to him their gates, and met him
with acclamations of joy, and called him their savior and benefactor.
But as the army was a great while in getting in at the gates, they were
so narrow, Vespasian commanded the south wall to be broken down, and
so made a broad passage for their entrance. However, he charged them to
abstain from rapine and injustice, in order to gratify the king; and on
his account spared the rest of the wall, while the king undertook for
them that they should continue [faithful to the Romans] for the time to
come. And thus did he restore this city to a quiet state, after it had
been grievously afflicted by the sedition.






CHAPTER 10.


     How Taricheae Was Taken. A Description Of The River Jordan,
     And Of The Country Of Gennesareth.

1. And now Vespasian pitched his camp between this city and Taricheae,
but fortified his camp more strongly, as suspecting that he should be
forced to stay there, and have a long war; for all the innovators had
gotten together at Taricheae, as relying upon the strength of the city,
and on the lake that lay by it. This lake is called by the people of
the country the Lake of Gennesareth. The city itself is situated like
Tiberias, at the bottom of a mountain, and on those sides which are not
washed by the sea, had been strongly fortified by Josephus, though not
so strongly as Tiberias; for the wall of Tiberias had been built at the
beginning of the Jews' revolt, when he had great plenty of money, and
great power, but Taricheae partook only the remains of that liberality,
Yet had they a great number of ships gotten ready upon the lake, that,
in case they were beaten at land, they might retire to them; and they
were so fitted up, that they might undertake a Sea-fight also. But as
the Romans were building a wall about their camp, Jesus and his party
were neither affrighted at their number, nor at the good order they were
in, but made a sally upon them; and at the very first onset the builders
of the wall were dispersed; and these pulled what little they had before
built to pieces; but as soon as they saw the armed men getting together,
and before they had suffered any thing themselves, they retired to their
own men. But then the Romans pursued them, and drove them into their
ships, where they launched out as far as might give them the opportunity
of reaching the Romans with what they threw at them, and then cast
anchor, and brought their ships close, as in a line of battle, and
thence fought the enemy from the sea, who were themselves at land. But
Vespasian hearing that a great multitude of them were gotten together in
the plain that was before the city, he thereupon sent his son, with six
hundred chosen horsemen, to disperse them.

2. But when Titus perceived that the enemy was very numerous, he sent to
his father, and informed him that he should want more forces. But as
he saw a great many of the horsemen eager to fight, and that before any
succors could come to them, and that yet some of them were privately
under a sort of consternation at the multitude of the Jews, he stood in
a place whence he might be heard, and said to them, "My brave Romans!
for it is right for me to put you in mind of what nation you are, in the
beginning of my speech, that so you may not be ignorant who you are, and
who they are against whom we are going to fight. For as to us, Romans,
no part of the habitable earth hath been able to escape our hands
hitherto; but as for the Jews, that I may speak of them too, though they
have been already beaten, yet do they not give up the cause; and a sad
thing it would be for us to grow wealthy under good success, when they
bear up under their misfortunes. As to the alacrity which you show
publicly, I see it, and rejoice at it; yet am I afraid lest the
multitude of the enemy should bring a concealed fright upon some of you:
let such a one consider again, who we are that are to fight, and who
those are against whom we are to fight. Now these Jews, though they be
very bold and great despisers of death, are but a disorderly body, and
unskillful in war, and may rather be called a rout than an army; while I
need say nothing of our skill and our good order; for this is the reason
why we Romans alone are exercised for war in time of peace, that we may
not think of number for number when we come to fight with our enemies:
for what advantage should we reap by our continual sort of warfare, if
we must still be equal in number to such as have not been used to war.
Consider further, that you are to have a conflict with men in effect
unarmed, while you are well armed; with footmen, while you are horsemen;
with those that have no good general, while you have one; and as these
advantages make you in effect manifold more than you are, so do
their disadvantages mightily diminish their number. Now it is not
the multitude of men, though they be soldiers, that manages wars with
success, but it is their bravery that does it, though they be but a
few; for a few are easily set in battle-array, and can easily assist one
another, while over-numerous armies are more hurt by themselves than by
their enemies. It is boldness and rashness, the effects of madness, that
conduct the Jews. Those passions indeed make a great figure when they
succeed, but are quite extinguished upon the least ill success; but we
are led on by courage, and obedience, and fortitude, which shows itself
indeed in our good fortune, but still does not for ever desert us in our
ill fortune. Nay, indeed, your fighting is to be on greater motives than
those of the Jews; for although they run the hazard of war for liberty,
and for their country, yet what can be a greater motive to us than
glory? and that it may never be said, that after we have got dominion
of the habitable earth, the Jews are able to confront us. We must also
reflect upon this, that there is no fear of our suffering any incurable
disaster in the present case; for those that are ready to assist us
are many, and at hand also; yet it is in our power to seize upon this
victory ourselves; and I think we ought to prevent the coming of those
my father is sending to us for our assistance, that our success may be
peculiar to ourselves, and of greater reputation to us. And I cannot but
think this an opportunity wherein my father, and I, and you shall be
all put to the trial, whether he be worthy of his former glorious
performances, whether I be his son in reality, and whether you be really
my soldiers; for it is usual for my father to conquer; and for myself, I
should not bear the thoughts of returning to him if I were once taken
by the enemy. And how will you be able to avoid being ashamed, if you do
not show equal courage with your commander, when he goes before you into
danger? For you know very well that I shall go into the danger first,
and make the first attack upon the enemy. Do not you therefore desert
me, but persuade yourselves that God will be assisting to my onset. Know
this also before we begin, that we shall now have better success than we
should have, if we were to fight at a distance."

3. As Titus was saying this, an extraordinary fury fell upon the men;
and as Trajan was already come before the fight began, with four hundred
horsemen, they were uneasy at it, because the reputation of the victory
would be diminished by being common to so many. Vespasian had also sent
both Antonius and Silo, with two thousand archers, and had given it them
in charge to seize upon the mountain that was over against the city,
and repel those that were upon the wall; which archers did as they were
commanded, and prevented those that attempted to assist them that way;
And now Titus made his own horse march first against the enemy, as did
the others with a great noise after him, and extended themselves upon
the plain as wide as the enemy which confronted them; by which means
they appeared much more numerous than they really were. Now the Jews,
although they were surprised at their onset, and at their good order,
made resistance against their attacks for a little while; but when they
were pricked with their long poles, and overborne by the violent noise
of the horsemen, they came to be trampled under their feet; many also of
them were slain on every side, which made them disperse themselves,
and run to the city, as fast as every one of them were able. So Titus
pressed upon the hindmost, and slew them; and of the rest, some he fell
upon as they stood on heaps, and some he prevented, and met them in the
mouth, and run them through; many also he leaped upon as they fell one
upon another, and trod them down, and cut off all the retreat they had
to the wall, and turned them back into the plain, till at last they
forced a passage by their multitude, and got away, and ran into the
city.

4. But now there fell out a terrible sedition among them within the
city; for the inhabitants themselves, who had possessions there, and
to whom the city belonged, were not disposed to fight from the very
beginning; and now the less so, because they had been beaten; but the
foreigners, which were very numerous, would force them to fight so much
the more, insomuch that there was a clamor and a tumult among them, as
all mutually angry one at another. And when Titus heard this tumult, for
he was not far from the wall, he cried out, "Fellow soldiers, now is the
time; and why do we make any delay, when God is giving up the Jews to
us? Take the victory which is given you: do not you hear what a noise
they make? Those that have escaped our hands are in an uproar against
one another. We have the city if we make haste; but besides haste, we
must undergo some labor, and use some courage; for no great thing uses
to be accomplished without danger: accordingly, we must not only prevent
their uniting again, which necessity will soon compel them to do, but we
must also prevent the coming of our own men to our assistance, that, as
few as we are, we may conquer so great a multitude, and may ourselves
alone take the city."

5. As soon as ever Titus had said this, he leaped upon his horse, and
rode apace down to the lake; by which lake he marched, and entered
into the city the first of them all, as did the others soon after him.
Hereupon those that were upon the walls were seized with a terror at the
boldness of the attempt, nor durst any one venture to fight with him,
or to hinder him; so they left guarding the city, and some of those that
were about Jesus fled over the country, while others of them ran down
to the lake, and met the enemy in the teeth, and some were slain as they
were getting up into the ships, but others of them as they attempted
to overtake those that were already gone aboard. There was also a great
slaughter made in the city, while those foreigners that had not fled
away already made opposition; but the natural inhabitants were killed
without fighting: for in hopes of Titus's giving them his right hand for
their security, and out of a consciousness that they had not given any
consent to the war, they avoided fighting, till Titus had slain the
authors of this revolt, and then put a stop to any further slaughters,
out of commiseration of these inhabitants of the place. But for those
that had fled to the lake, upon seeing the city taken, they sailed as
far as they possibly could from the enemy.

6. Hereupon Titus sent one of his horsemen to his father, and let him
know the good news of what he had done; at which, as was natural, he was
very joyful, both on account of the courage and glorious actions of his
son; for he thought that now the greatest part of the war was over. He
then came thither himself, and set men to guard the city, and gave them
command to take care that nobody got privately out of it, but to kill
such as attempted so to do. And on the next day he went down to the
lake, and commanded that vessels should be fitted up, in order to pursue
those that had escaped in the ships. These vessels were quickly gotten
ready accordingly, because there was great plenty of materials, and a
great number of artificers also.

7. Now this lake of Gennesareth is so called from the country adjoining
to it. Its breadth is forty furlongs, and its length one hundred and
forty; its waters are sweet, and very agreeable for drinking, for they
are finer than the thick waters of other fens; the lake is also pure,
and on every side ends directly at the shores, and at the sand; it is
also of a temperate nature when you draw it up, and of a more gentle
nature than river or fountain water, and yet always cooler than one
could expect in so diffuse a place as this is. Now when this water
is kept in the open air, it is as cold as that snow which the country
people are accustomed to make by night in summer. There are several
kinds of fish in it, different both to the taste and the sight from
those elsewhere. It is divided into two parts by the river Jordan. Now
Panium is thought to be the fountain of Jordan, but in reality it is
carried thither after an occult manner from the place called Phiala:
this place lies as you go up to Trachonitis, and is a hundred and twenty
furlongs from Cesarea, and is not far out of the road on the right hand;
and indeed it hath its name of Phiala [vial or bowl] very justly, from
the roundness of its circumference, as being round like a wheel; its
water continues always up to its edges, without either sinking or
running over. And as this origin of Jordan was formerly not known, it
was discovered so to be when Philip was tetrarch of Trachonitis; for
he had chaff thrown into Phiala, and it was found at Paninto, where the
ancients thought the fountain-head of the river was, whither it had been
therefore carried [by the waters]. As for Panium itself, its natural
beauty had been improved by the royal liberality of Agrippa, and adorned
at his expenses. Now Jordan's visible stream arises from this cavern,
and divides the marshes and fens of the lake Semechonitis; when it hath
run another hundred and twenty furlongs, it first passes by the city
Julias, and then passes through the middle of the lake Gennesareth;
after which it runs a long way over a desert, and then makes its exit
into the lake Asphaltites.

8. The country also that lies over against this lake hath the same name
of Gennesareth; its nature is wonderful as well as its beauty; its
soil is so fruitful that all sorts of trees can grow upon it, and the
inhabitants accordingly plant all sorts of trees there; for the temper
of the air is so well mixed, that it agrees very well with those several
sorts, particularly walnuts, which require the coldest air, flourish
there in vast plenty; there are palm trees also, which grow best in hot
air; fig trees also and olives grow near them, which yet require an air
that is more temperate. One may call this place the ambition of nature,
where it forces those plants that are naturally enemies to one another
to agree together; it is a happy contention of the seasons, as if
every one of them laid claim to this country; for it not only nourishes
different sorts of autumnal fruit beyond men's expectation, but
preserves them a great while; it supplies men with the principal fruits,
with grapes and figs continually, during ten months of the year 7 and
the rest of the fruits as they become ripe together through the whole
year; for besides the good temperature of the air, it is also watered
from a most fertile fountain. The people of the country call it
Capharnaum. Some have thought it to be a vein of the Nile, because it
produces the Coracin fish as well as that lake does which is near to
Alexandria. The length of this country extends itself along the banks
of this lake that bears the same name for thirty furlongs, and is in
breadth twenty, And this is the nature of that place.

9. But now, when the vessels were gotten ready, Vespasian put upon
ship-board as many of his forces as he thought sufficient to be too hard
for those that were upon the lake, and set sail after them. Now these
which were driven into the lake could neither fly to the land, where
all was in their enemies' hand, and in war against them; nor could they
fight upon the level by sea, for their ships were small and fitted only
for piracy; they were too weak to fight with Vespasian's vessels, and
the mariners that were in them were so few, that they were afraid to
come near the Romans, who attacked them in great numbers. However, as
they sailed round about the vessels, and sometimes as they came near
them, they threw stones at the Romans when they were a good way off,
or came closer and fought them; yet did they receive the greatest harm
themselves in both cases. As for the stones they threw at the Romans,
they only made a sound one after another, for they threw them against
such as were in their armor, while the Roman darts could reach the Jews
themselves; and when they ventured to come near the Romans, they became
sufferers themselves before they could do any harm to the ether,
and were drowned, they and their ships together. As for those that
endeavored to come to an actual fight, the Romans ran many of them
through with their long poles. Sometimes the Romans leaped into their
ships, with swords in their hands, and slew them; but when some of them
met the vessels, the Romans caught them by the middle, and destroyed at
once their ships and themselves who were taken in them. And for such as
were drowning in the sea, if they lifted their heads up above the water,
they were either killed by darts, or caught by the vessels; but if,
in the desperate case they were in, they attempted to swim to their
enemies, the Romans cut off either their heads or their hands; and
indeed they were destroyed after various manners every where, till the
rest being put to flight, were forced to get upon the land, while the
vessels encompassed them about [on the sea]: but as many of these were
repulsed when they were getting ashore, they were killed by the darts
upon the lake; and the Romans leaped out of their vessels, and destroyed
a great many more upon the land: one might then see the lake all bloody,
and full of dead bodies, for not one of them escaped. And a terrible
stink, and a very sad sight there was on the following days over that
country; for as for the shores, they were full of shipwrecks, and of
dead bodies all swelled; and as the dead bodies were inflamed by the
sun, and putrefied, they corrupted the air, insomuch that the misery
was not only the object of commiseration to the Jews, but to those that
hated them, and had been the authors of that misery. This was the upshot
of the sea-fight. The number of the slain, including those that were
killed in the city before, was six thousand and five hundred.

10. After this fight was over, Vespasian sat upon his tribunal
at Taricheae, in order to distinguish the foreigners from the old
inhabitants; for those foreigners appear to have begun the war. So he
deliberated with the other commanders, whether he ought to save those
old inhabitants or not. And when those commanders alleged that the
dismission of them would be to his own disadvantage, because, when they
were once set at liberty, they would not be at rest, since they would be
people destitute of proper habitations, and would be able to compel such
as they fled to fight against us, Vespasian acknowledged that they did
not deserve to be saved, and that if they had leave given them to fly
away, they would make use of it against those that gave them that leave.
But still he considered with himself after what manner they should be
slain 8 for if he had them slain there, he suspected the people of the
country would thereby become his enemies; for that to be sure they would
never bear it, that so many that had been supplicants to him should
be killed; and to offer violence to them, after he had given them
assurances of their lives, he could not himself bear to do it. However,
his friends were too hard for him, and pretended that nothing against
Jews could be any impiety, and that he ought to prefer what was
profitable before what was fit to be done, where both could not be made
consistent. So he gave them an ambiguous liberty to do as they advised,
and permitted the prisoners to go along no other road than that which
led to Tiberias only. So they readily believed what they desired to be
true, and went along securely, with their effects, the way which was
allowed them, while the Romans seized upon all the road that led to
Tiberias, that none of them might go out of it, and shut them up in the
city. Then came Vespasian, and ordered them all to stand in the stadium,
and commanded them to kill the old men, together with the others that
were useless, which were in number a thousand and two hundred. Out of
the young men he chose six thousand of the strongest, and sent them to
Nero, to dig through the Isthmus, and sold the remainder for slaves,
being thirty thousand and four hundred, besides such as he made a
present of to Agrippa; for as to those that belonged to his kingdom, he
gave him leave to do what he pleased with them; however, the king sold
these also for slaves; but for the rest of the multitude, who were
Trachonites, and Gaulanites, and of Hippos, and some of Gadara, the
greatest part of them were seditious persons and fugitives, who were of
such shameful characters, that they preferred war before peace. These
prisoners were taken on the eighth day of the month Gorpieus [Elul].

WAR BOOK 3 FOOTNOTES

1 (return) [ Take the confirmation of this in the words of Suetonius,
here produced by Dr. Hudson: "In the reign of Claudius," says he,
"Vespasian, for the sake of Narcissus, was sent as a lieutenant of a
legion into Germany. Thence he removed into Britain battles with the
enemy." In Vesp. sect. 4. We may also here note from Josephus, that
Claudius the emperor, who triumphed for the conquest of Britain, was
enabled so to do by Vespasian's conduct and bravery, and that he is here
styled "the father of Vespasian."]


2 (return) [ Spanheim and Reland both agree, that the two cities here
esteemed greater than Antioch, the metropolis of Syria, were Rome and
Alexandria; nor is there any occasion for doubt in so plain a case.]


3 (return) [ This description of the exact symmetry and regularity of
the Roman army, and of the Roman encampments, with the sounding their
trumpets, etc. and order of war, described in this and the next chapter,
is so very like to the symmetry and regularity of the people of Israel
in the wilderness, [see Description of the Temples, ch. 9.,] that one
cannot well avoid the supposal, that the one was the ultimate pattern
of the other, and that the tactics of the ancients were taken from the
rules given by God to Moses. And it is thought by some skillful in
these matters, that these accounts of Josephus, as to the Roman camp and
armor, and conduct in war, are preferable to those in the Roman authors
themselves.]


4 (return) [ I cannot but here observe an Eastern way of speaking,
frequent among them, but not usual among us, where the word "only"
or "alone" is not set down, but perhaps some way supplied in the
pronunciation. Thus Josephus here says, that those of Jotapata slew
seven of the Romans as they were marching off, because the Romans'
retreat was regular, their bodies were covered over with their armor,
and the Jews fought at some distance; his meaning is clear, that these
were the reasons why they slew only, or no more than seven. I have met
with many the like examples in the Scriptures, in Josephus, etc.; but
did not note down the particular places. This observation ought to be
borne in mind upon many occasions.]


5 (return) [ These public mourners, hired upon the supposed death of
Josephus, and the real death of many more, illustrate some passages in
the Bible, which suppose the same custom, as Matthew 11:17, where the
reader may consult the notes of Grotius.]


6 (return) [ Of this Cesarea Philippi [twice mentioned in our New
Testament, Matthew 16:13; Mark 8;27: there are coins still extant,
Spanheim here informs us.]


7 (return) [ I do not know where to find the law of Moses here mentioned
by Josephus, and afterwards by Eleazar, 13. VII. ch. 8. sect. 7, and
almost implied in B. I. ch. 13. sect. 10, by Josephus's commendation of
Phasaelus for doing so; I mean, whereby Jewish generals and people were
obliged to kill themselves, rather than go into slavery under heathens.
I doubt this would have been no better than "self-murder;" and I believe
it was rather some vain doctrine, or interpretation, of the rigid
Pharisees, or Essens, or Herodiaus, than a just consequence from any law
of God delivered by Moses.

(It may be worth our while to observe here, that near this lake of
Gennesareth grapes and figs hang on the trees ten months of the year.
We may observe also, that in Cyril of Jerusalem, Cateehes. 18. sect. 3,
which was delivered not long before Easter, there were no fresh leaves
of fig trees, nor bunches of fresh grapes in Judea; so that when St.
Mark says, ch. 11. ver. 13, that our Savior, soon after the same time of
the year, came and "found leaves" on a fig tree near Jerusalem, but "no
figs, because the time of" new "figs" ripening "was not yet," he says
very true; nor were they therefore other than old leaves which our
Savior saw, and old figs which he expected, and which even with us
commonly hang on the trees all winter long.)]


8 (return) [ This is the most cruel and barbarous action that Vespasian
ever did in this whole war, as he did it with great reluctance also.
It was done both after public assurance given of sparing the prisoners'
lives, and when all knew and confessed that these prisoners were no way
guilty of any sedition against the Romans. Nor indeed did Titus now give
his consent, so far as appears, nor ever act of himself so barbarously;
nay, soon after this, Titus grew quite weary of shedding blood, and of
punishing the innocent with the guilty, and gave the people of Gischala
leave to keep the Jewish sabbath, B. IV. ch. 2. sect. 3, 5, in the midst
of their siege. Nor was Vespasian disposed to do what he did, till his
officers persuaded him, and that from two principal topics, viz. that
nothing could be unjust that was done against Jews; and that when both
cannot be consistent, advantage must prevail over justice. Admirable
court doctrines these!]







BOOK IV.


     Containing The Interval Of About One Year.


     From The Siege Of Gamala To The Coming Of Titus To Besiege
     Jerusalem.





CHAPTER 1.


     The Siege And Taking Of Gamala.

1. Now all those Galileans who, after the taking of Jotapata, had
revolted from the Romans, did, upon the conquest of Taricheae, deliver
themselves up to them again. And the Romans received all the fortresses
and the cities, excepting Gischala and those that had seized upon Mount
Tabor; Gamala also, which is a city over against Taricheae, but on the
other side of the lake, conspired with them. This city lay upon the
borders of Agrippa's kingdom, as also did Sogana and Seleucia. And these
were both parts of Gaulanitis; for Sogana was a part of that called
the Upper Gaulanitis, as was Gamala of the Lower; while Seleucia was
situated at the lake Semechouitis, which lake is thirty furlongs in
breadth, and sixty in length; its marshes reach as far as the place
Daphne, which in other respects is a delicious place, and hath such
fountains as supply water to what is called Little Jordan, under the
temple of the golden calf, 1 where it is sent into Great Jordan. Now
Agrippa had united Sogana and Seleucia by leagues to himself, at the
very beginning of the revolt from the Romans; yet did not Gamala accede
to them, but relied upon the difficulty of the place, which was greater
than that of Jotapata, for it was situated upon a rough ridge of a high
mountain, with a kind of neck in the middle: where it begins to ascend,
it lengthens itself, and declines as much downward before as behind,
insomuch that it is like a camel in figure, from whence it is so named,
although the people of the country do not pronounce it accurately. Both
on the side and the face there are abrupt parts divided from the rest,
and ending in vast deep valleys; yet are the parts behind, where they
are joined to the mountain, somewhat easier of ascent than the other;
but then the people belonging to the place have cut an oblique ditch
there, and made that hard to be ascended also. On its acclivity, which
is straight, houses are built, and those very thick and close to one
another. The city also hangs so strangely, that it looks as if it would
fall down upon itself, so sharp is it at the top. It is exposed to the
south, and its southern mount, which reaches to an immense height, was
in the nature of a citadel to the city; and above that was a precipice,
not walled about, but extending itself to an immense depth. There was
also a spring of water within the wall, at the utmost limits of the
city.

2. As this city was naturally hard to be taken, so had Josephus, by
building a wall about it, made it still stronger, as also by ditches and
mines under ground. The people that were in it were made more bold by
the nature of the place than the people of Jotapata had been, but it
had much fewer fighting men in it; and they had such a confidence in
the situation of the place, that they thought the enemy could not be too
many for them; for the city had been filled with those that had fled
to it for safety, on account of its strength; on which account they
had been able to resist those whom Agrippa sent to besiege it for seven
months together.

3. But Vespasian removed from Emmaus, where he had last pitched his
camp before the city Tiberias, [now Emmaus, if it be interpreted, may
be rendered "a warm bath," for therein is a spring of warm water, useful
for healing,] and came to Gamala; yet was its situation such that he was
not able to encompass it all round with soldiers to watch it; but where
the places were practicable, he set men to watch it, and seized upon the
mountain which was over it. And as the legions, according to their usual
custom, were fortifying their camp upon that mountain, he began to cast
up banks at the bottom, at the part towards the east, where the highest
tower of the whole city was, and where the fifteenth legion pitched
their camp; while the fifth legion did duty over against the midst of
the city, and whilst the tenth legion filled up the ditches and the
valleys. Now at this time it was that as king Agrippa was come nigh
the walls, and was endeavoring to speak to those that were on the walls
about a surrender, he was hit with a stone on his right elbow by one of
the slingers; he was then immediately surrounded with his own men. But
the Romans were excited to set about the siege, by their indignation
on the king's account, and by their fear on their own account, as
concluding that those men would omit no kinds of barbarity against
foreigners and enemies, who where so enraged against one of their own
nation, and one that advised them to nothing but what was for their own
advantage.

4. Now when the banks were finished, which was done on the sudden, both
by the multitude of hands, and by their being accustomed to such work,
they brought the machines; but Chares and Joseph, who were the most
potent men in the city, set their armed men in order, though already
in a fright, because they did not suppose that the city could hold out
long, since they had not a sufficient quantity either of water, or of
other necessaries. However, these their leaders encouraged them, and
brought them out upon the wall, and for a while indeed they drove away
those that were bringing the machines; but when those machines threw
darts and stones at them, they retired into the city; then did the
Romans bring battering rams to three several places, and made the wall
shake [and fall]. They then poured in over the parts of the wall that
were thrown down, with a mighty sound of trumpets and noise of armor,
and with a shout of the soldiers, and brake in by force upon those that
were in the city; but these men fell upon the Romans for some time, at
their first entrance, and prevented their going any further, and with
great courage beat them back; and the Romans were so overpowered by the
greater multitude of the people, who beat them on every side, that they
were obliged to run into the upper parts of the city. Whereupon the
people turned about, and fell upon their enemies, who had attacked them,
and thrust them down to the lower parts, and as they were distressed
by the narrowness and difficulty of the place, slew them; and as these
Romans could neither beat those back that were above them, nor escape
the force of their own men that were forcing their way forward, they
were compelled to fly into their enemies' houses, which were low; but
these houses being thus full, of soldiers, whose weight they could not
bear, fell down suddenly; and when one house fell, it shook down a great
many of those that were under it, as did those do to such as were under
them. By this means a vast number of the Romans perished; for they were
so terribly distressed, that although they saw the houses subsiding,
they were compelled to leap upon the tops of them; so that a great many
were ground to powder by these ruins, and a great many of those that
got from under them lost some of their limbs, but still a greater number
were suffocated by the dust that arose from those ruins. The people
of Gamala supposed this to be an assistance afforded them by God, and
without regarding what damage they suffered themselves, they pressed
forward, and thrust the enemy upon the tops of their houses; and when
they stumbled in the sharp and narrow streets, and were perpetually
falling down, they threw their stones or darts at them, and slew them.
Now the very ruins afforded them stones enow; and for iron weapons,
the dead men of the enemies' side afforded them what they wanted; for
drawing the swords of those that were dead, they made use of them to
despatch such as were only half dead; nay, there were a great number
who, upon their falling down from the tops of the houses, stabbed
themselves, and died after that manner; nor indeed was it easy for those
that were beaten back to fly away; for they were so unacquainted with
the ways, and the dust was so thick, that they wandered about without
knowing one another, and fell down dead among the crowd.

5. Those therefore that were able to find the ways out of the city
retired. But now Vespasian always staid among those that were hard set;
for he was deeply affected with seeing the ruins of the city falling
upon his army, and forgot to take care of his own preservation. He went
up gradually towards the highest parts of the city before he was aware,
and was left in the midst of dangers, having only a very few with him;
for even his son Titus was not with him at that time, having been then
sent into Syria to Mucianus. However, he thought it not safe to fly,
nor did he esteem it a fit thing for him to do; but calling to mind the
actions he had done from his youth, and recollecting his courage, as if
he had been excited by a divine fury, he covered himself and those that
were with him with their shields, and formed a testudo over both their
bodies and their armor, and bore up against the enemy's attacks, who
came running down from the top of the city; and without showing any
dread at the multitude of the men or of their darts, he endured all,
until the enemy took notice of that divine courage that was within him,
and remitted of their attacks; and when they pressed less zealously upon
him, he retired, though without showing his back to them till he was
gotten out of the walls of the city. Now a great number of the Romans
fell in this battle, among whom was Ebutius, the decurion, a man who
appeared not only in this engagement, wherein he fell, but every where,
and in former engagements, to be of the truest courage, and one that had
done very great mischief to the Jews. But there was a centurion whose
name was Gallus, who, during this disorder, being encompassed about,
he and ten other soldiers privately crept into the house of a certain
person, where he heard them talking at supper, what the people intended
to do against the Romans, or about themselves [for both the man himself
and those with him were Syrians]. So he got up in the night time, and
cut all their throats, and escaped, together with his soldiers, to the
Romans.

6. And now Vespasian comforted his army, which was much dejected by
reflecting on their ill success, and because they had never before
fallen into such a calamity, and besides this, because they were greatly
ashamed that they had left their general alone in great dangers. As to
what concerned himself, he avoided to say any thing, that he might by
no means seem to complain of it; but he said that "we ought to bear
manfully what usually falls out in war, and this, by considering what
the nature of war is, and how it can never be that we must conquer
without bloodshed on our own side; for there stands about us that
fortune which is of its own nature mutable; that while they had killed
so many ten thousands of the Jews, they had now paid their small share
of the reckoning to fate; and as it is the part of weak people to be too
much puffed up with good success, so is it the part of cowards to be too
much affrighted at that which is ill; for the change from the one to the
other is sudden on both sides; and he is the best warrior who is of a
sober mind under misfortunes, that he may continue in that temper, and
cheerfully recover what had been lost formerly; and as for what had now
happened, it was neither owing to their own effeminacy, nor to the valor
of the Jews, but the difficulty of the place was the occasion of their
advantage, and of our disappointment. Upon reflecting on which matter
one might blame your zeal as perfectly ungovernable; for when the enemy
had retired to their highest fastnesses, you ought to have restrained
yourselves, and not, by presenting yourselves at the top of the city, to
be exposed to dangers; but upon your having obtained the lower parts of
the city, you ought to have provoked those that had retired thither to
a safe and settled battle; whereas, in rushing so hastily upon victory,
you took no care of your safety. But this incautiousness in war, and
this madness of zeal, is not a Roman maxim. While we perform all that
we attempt by skill and good order, that procedure is the part of
barbarians, and is what the Jews chiefly support themselves by. We ought
therefore to return to our own virtue, and to be rather angry than any
longer dejected at this unlucky misfortune, and let every one seek for
his own consolation from his own hand; for by this means he will avenge
those that have been destroyed, and punish those that have killed them.
For myself, I will endeavor, as I have now done, to go first before
you against your enemies in every engagement, and to be the last that
retires from it."

7. So Vespasian encouraged his army by this speech; but for the people
of Gamala, it happened that they took courage for a little while, upon
such great and unaccountable success as they had had. But when they
considered with themselves that they had now no hopes of any terms of
accommodation, and reflecting upon it that they could not get away, and
that their provisions began already to be short, they were exceedingly
cast down, and their courage failed them; yet did they not neglect what
might be for their preservation, so far as they were able, but the most
courageous among them guarded those parts of the wall that were beaten
down, while the more infirm did the same to the rest of the wall that
still remained round the city. And as the Romans raised their banks, and
attempted to get into the city a second time, a great many of them fled
out of the city through impracticable valleys, where no guards were
placed, as also through subterraneous caverns; while those that were
afraid of being caught, and for that reason staid in the city, perished
for want of food; for what food they had was brought together from all
quarters, and reserved for the fighting men.

8. And these were the hard circumstances that the people of Gamala
were in. But now Vespasian went about other work by the by, during this
siege, and that was to subdue those that had seized upon Mount Tabor, a
place that lies in the middle between the great plain and Scythopolis,
whose top is elevated as high as thirty furlongs 2 and is hardly to be
ascended on its north side; its top is a plain of twenty-six furlongs,
and all encompassed with a wall. Now Josephus erected this so long a
wall in forty days' time, and furnished it with other materials, and
with water from below, for the inhabitants only made use of rain water.
As therefore there was a great multitude of people gotten together
upon this mountain, Vespasian sent Placidus with six hundred horsemen
thither. Now, as it was impossible for him to ascend the mountain, he
invited many of them to peace, by the offer of his right hand for their
security, and of his intercession for them. Accordingly they came down,
but with a treacherous design, as well as he had the like treacherous
design upon them on the other side; for Placidus spoke mildly to them,
as aiming to take them, when he got them into the plain; they also came
down, as complying with his proposals, but it was in order to fall upon
him when he was not aware of it: however, Placidus's stratagem was too
hard for theirs; for when the Jews began to fight, he pretended to run
away, and when they were in pursuit of the Romans, he enticed them
a great way along the plain, and then made his horsemen turn back;
whereupon he beat them, and slew a great number of them, and cut off the
retreat of the rest of the multitude, and hindered their return. So they
left Tabor, and fled to Jerusalem, while the people of the country came
to terms with him, for their water failed them, and so they delivered up
the mountain and themselves to Placidus.

9. But of the people of Gamala, those that were of the bolder sort fled
away and hid themselves, while the more infirm perished by famine; but
the men of war sustained the siege till the two and twentieth day of
the month Hyperbereteus, [Tisri,] when three soldiers of the fifteenth
legion, about the morning watch, got under a high tower that was near
them, and undermined it, without making any noise; nor when they either
came to it, which was in the night time, nor when they were under it,
did those that guarded it perceive them. These soldiers then upon their
coming avoided making a noise, and when they had rolled away five of its
strongest stones, they went away hastily; whereupon the tower fell down
on a sudden, with a very great noise, and its guard fell headlong
with it; so that those that kept guard at other places were under such
disturbance, that they ran away; the Romans also slew many of those that
ventured to oppose them, among whom was Joseph, who was slain by a dart,
as he was running away over that part of the wall that was broken down:
but as those that were in the city were greatly affrighted at the noise,
they ran hither and thither, and a great consternation fell upon them,
as though all the enemy had fallen in at once upon them. Then it was
that Chares, who was ill, and under the physician's hands, gave up the
ghost, the fear he was in greatly contributing to make his distemper
fatal to him. But the Romans so well remembered their former ill
success, that they did not enter the city till the three and twentieth
day of the forementioned month.

10. At which time Titus, who was now returned, out of the indignation
he had at the destruction the Romans had undergone while he was absent,
took two hundred chosen horsemen and some footmen with him, and entered
without noise into the city. Now as the watch perceived that he was
coming, they made a noise, and betook themselves to their arms; and as
that his entrance was presently known to those that were in the city,
some of them caught hold of their children and their wives, and drew
them after them, and fled away to the citadel, with lamentations
and cries, while others of them went to meet Titus, and were killed
perpetually; but so many of them as were hindered from running up to
the citadel, not knowing what in the world to do, fell among the Roman
guards, while the groans of those that were killed were prodigiously
great every where, and blood ran down over all the lower parts of the
city, from the upper. But then Vespasian himself came to his assistance
against those that had fled to the citadel, and brought his whole army
with him; now this upper part of the city was every way rocky, and
difficult of ascent, and elevated to a vast altitude, and very full of
people on all sides, and encompassed with precipices, whereby the Jews
cut off those that came up to them, and did much mischief to others
by their darts, and the large stones which they rolled down upon them,
while they were themselves so high that the enemy's darts could hardly
reach them. However, there arose such a Divine storm against them as
was instrumental to their destruction; this carried the Roman darts
upon them, and made those which they threw return back, and drove them
obliquely away from them; nor could the Jews indeed stand upon their
precipices, by reason of the violence of the wind, having nothing that
was stable to stand upon, nor could they see those that were ascending
up to them; so the Romans got up and surrounded them, and some they slew
before they could defend themselves, and others as they were delivering
up themselves; and the remembrance of those that were slain at their
former entrance into the city increased their rage against them now;
a great number also of those that were surrounded on every side,
and despaired of escaping, threw their children and their wives, and
themselves also, down the precipices, into the valley beneath, which,
near the citadel, had been dug hollow to a vast depth; but so it
happened, that the anger of the Romans appeared not to be so extravagant
as was the madness of those that were now taken, while the Romans
slew but four thousand, whereas the number of those that had thrown
themselves down was found to be five thousand: nor did any one escape
except two women, who were the daughters of Philip, and Philip himself
was the son of a certain eminent man called Jacimus, who had been
general of king Agrippa's army; and these did therefore escape, because
they lay concealed from the rage of the Romans when the city was taken;
for otherwise they spared not so much as the infants, of which many were
flung down by them from the citadel. And thus was Gamala taken on the
three and twentieth day of the month Hyperbereteus, [Tisri,] whereas
the city had first revolted on the four and twentieth day of the month
Gorpieus [Elul].






CHAPTER 2.


     The Surrender Of Gischala; While John Flies Away From It To
     Jerusalem.

1. Now no place of Galilee remained to be taken but the small city of
Gischala, whose multitude yet were desirous of peace; for they were
generally husbandmen, and always applied themselves to cultivate the
fruits of the earth. However, there were a great number that belonged to
a band of robbers, that were already corrupted, and had crept in among
them, and some of the governing part of the citizens were sick of the
same distemper. It was John, the son of a certain man whose name was
Levi, that drew them into this rebellion, and encouraged them in it. He
was a cunning knave, and of a temper that could put on various shapes;
very rash in expecting great things, and very sagacious in bringing
about what he hoped for. It was known to every body that he was fond of
war, in order to thrust himself into authority; and the seditious part
of the people of Gischala were under his management, by whose means the
populace, who seemed ready to send ambassadors in order to surrender,
waited for the coming of the Romans in battle-array. Vespasian sent
against them Titus, with a thousand horsemen, but withdrew the tenth
legion to Scythopolis, while he returned to Cesarea with the two other
legions, that he might allow them to refresh themselves after their long
and hard campaign, thinking withal that the plenty which was in those
cities would improve their bodies and their spirits, against the
difficulties they were to go through afterwards; for he saw there would
be occasion for great pains about Jerusalem, which was not yet taken,
because it was the royal city, and the principal city of the whole
nation, and because those that had run away from the war in other places
got all together thither. It was also naturally strong, and the walls
that were built round it made him not a little concerned about it.
Moreover, he esteemed the men that were in it to be so courageous and
bold, that even without the consideration of the walls, it would be
hard to subdue them; for which reason he took care of and exercised his
soldiers beforehand for the work, as they do wrestlers before they begin
their undertaking.

2. Now Titus, as he rode out to Gischala, found it would be easy for him
to take the city upon the first onset; but knew withal, that if he took
it by force, the multitude would be destroyed by the soldiers without
mercy. [Now he was already satiated with the shedding of blood, and
pitied the major part, who would then perish, without distinction,
together with the guilty.] So he was rather desirous the city might be
surrendered up to him on terms. Accordingly, when he saw the wall full
of those men that were of the corrupted party, he said to them, That he
could not but wonder what it was they depended on, when they alone
staid to fight the Romans, after every other city was taken by them,
especially when they have seen cities much better fortified than theirs
is overthrown by a single attack upon them; while as many as have
intrusted themselves to the security of the Romans' right hands, which
he now offers to them, without regarding their former insolence, do
enjoy their own possessions in safety; for that while they had hopes
of recovering their liberty, they might be pardoned; but that their
continuance still in their opposition, when they saw that to be
impossible, was inexcusable; for that if they will not comply with such
humane offers, and right hands for security, they should have experience
of such a war as would spare nobody, and should soon be made sensible
that their wall would be but a trifle, when battered by the Roman
machines; in depending on which they demonstrate themselves to be the
only Galileans that were no better than arrogant slaves and captives.

3. Now none of the populace durst not only make a reply, but durst not
so much as get upon the wall, for it was all taken up by the robbers,
who were also the guard at the gates, in order to prevent any of the
rest from going out, in order to propose terms of submission, and from
receiving any of the horsemen into the city. But John returned
Titus this answer: That for himself he was content to hearken to his
proposals, and that he would either persuade or force those that refused
them. Yet he said that Titus ought to have such regard to the Jewish
law, as to grant them leave to celebrate that day, which was the seventh
day of the week, on which it was unlawful not only to remove their
arms, but even to treat of peace also; and that even the Romans were not
ignorant how the period of the seventh day was among them a cessation
from all labors; and that he who should compel them to transgress
the law about that day would be equally guilty with those that
were compelled to transgress it: and that this delay could be of no
disadvantage to him; for why should any body think of doing any thing in
the night, unless it was to fly away? which he might prevent by placing
his camp round about them; and that they should think it a great point
gained, if they might not be obliged to transgress the laws of their
country; and that it would be a right thing for him, who designed to
grant them peace, without their expectation of such a favor, to preserve
the laws of those they saved inviolable. Thus did this man put a trick
upon Titus, not so much out of regard to the seventh day as to his own
preservation, for he was afraid lest he should be quite deserted if the
city should be taken, and had his hopes of life in that night, and
in his flight therein. Now this was the work of God, who therefore
preserved this John, that he might bring on the destruction of
Jerusalem; as also it was his work that Titus was prevailed with by this
pretense for a delay, and that he pitched his camp further off the
city at Cydessa. This Cydessa was a strong Mediterranean village of the
Tyrians, which always hated and made war against the Jews; it had also
a great number of inhabitants, and was well fortified, which made it a
proper place for such as were enemies to the Jewish nation.

4. Now, in the night time, when John saw that there was no Roman guard
about the city, he seized the opportunity directly, and, taking with him
not only the armed men that were about him, but a considerable number
of those that had little to do, together with their families, he fled to
Jerusalem. And indeed, though the man was making haste to get away, and
was tormented with fears of being a captive, or of losing his life, yet
did he prevail with himself to take out of the city along with him a
multitude of women and children, as far as twenty furlongs; but there he
left them as he proceeded further on his journey, where those that were
left behind made sad lamentations; for the farther every one of them was
come from his own people, the nearer they thought themselves to be to
their enemies. They also affrighted themselves with this thought, that
those who would carry them into captivity were just at hand, and still
turned themselves back at the mere noise they made themselves in this
their hasty flight, as if those from whom they fled were just upon them.
Many also of them missed their ways, and the earnestness of such as
aimed to outgo the rest threw down many of them. And indeed there was a
miserable destruction made of the women and children; while some of them
took courage to call their husbands and kinsmen back, and to beseech
them, with the bitterest lamentations, to stay for them; but John's
exhortation, who cried out to them to save themselves, and fly away,
prevailed. He said also, that if the Romans should seize upon those
whom they left behind, they would be revenged on them for it. So this
multitude that run thus away was dispersed abroad, according as each of
them was able to run, one faster or slower than another.

5. Now on the next day Titus came to the wall, to make the agreement;
whereupon the people opened their gates to him, and came out to him,
with their children and wives, and made acclamations of joy to him, as
to one that had been their benefactor, and had delivered the city out
of custody; they also informed him of John's flight, and besought him
to spare them, and to come in, and bring the rest of those that were
for innovations to punishment. But Titus, not so much regarding the
supplications of the people, sent part of his horsemen to pursue after
John, but they could not overtake him, for he was gotten to Jerusalem
before; they also slew six thousand of the women and children who went
out with him, but returned back, and brought with them almost three
thousand. However, Titus was greatly displeased that he had not been
able to bring this John, who had deluded him, to punishment; yet he had
captives enough, as well as the corrupted part of the city, to satisfy
his anger, when it missed of John. So he entered the city in the midst
of acclamations of joy; and when he had given orders to the soldiers
to pull down a small part of the wall, as of a city taken in war, he
repressed those that had disturbed the city rather by threatenings than
by executions; for he thought that many would accuse innocent persons,
out of their own private animosities and quarrels, if he should attempt
to distinguish those that were worthy of punishment from the rest; and
that it was better to let a guilty person alone in his fears, that to
destroy with him any one that did not deserve it; for that probably such
a one might be taught prudence, by the fear of the punishment he had
deserved, and have a shame upon him for his former offenses, when he had
been forgiven; but that the punishment of such as have been once put
to death could never be retrieved. However, he placed a garrison in the
city for its security, by which means he should restrain those that were
for innovations, and should leave those that were peaceably disposed
in greater security. And thus was all Galilee taken, but this not till
after it had cost the Romans much pains before it could be taken by
them.






CHAPTER 3.


     Concerning John Of Gischala. Concerning The Zealots And The
     High Priest Ananus; As Also How The Jews Raise Seditions One
     Against Another [In Jerusalem].

1. Now upon John's entry into Jerusalem, the whole body of the people
were in an uproar, and ten thousand of them crowded about every one of
the fugitives that were come to them, and inquired of them what miseries
had happened abroad, when their breath was so short, and hot, and quick,
that of itself it declared the great distress they were in; yet did they
talk big under their misfortunes, and pretended to say that they had not
fled away from the Romans, but came thither in order to fight them with
less hazard; for that it would be an unreasonable and a fruitless thing
for them to expose themselves to desperate hazards about Gischala, and
such weak cities, whereas they ought to lay up their weapons and their
zeal, and reserve it for their metropolis. But when they related to them
the taking of Gischala, and their decent departure, as they pretended,
from that place, many of the people understood it to be no better than a
flight; and especially when the people were told of those that were made
captives, they were in great confusion, and guessed those things to be
plain indications that they should be taken also. But for John, he was
very little concerned for those whom he had left behind him, but went
about among all the people, and persuaded them to go to war, by the
hopes he gave them. He affirmed that the affairs of the Romans were in
a weak condition, and extolled his own power. He also jested upon the
ignorance of the unskillful, as if those Romans, although they should
take to themselves wings, could never fly over the wall of Jerusalem,
who found such great difficulties in taking the villages of Galilee, and
had broken their engines of war against their walls.

2. These harangues of John's corrupted a great part of the young men,
and puffed them up for the war; but as to the more prudent part, and
those in years, there was not a man of them but foresaw what was coming,
and made lamentation on that account, as if the city was already undone;
and in this confusion were the people. But then it must be observed,
that the multitude that came out of the country were at discord before
the Jerusalem sedition began; for Titus went from Gischala to Cesates,
and Vespasian from Cesarea to Jamnia and Azotus, and took them both; and
when he had put garrisons into them, he came back with a great number
of the people, who were come over to him, upon his giving them his right
hand for their preservation. There were besides disorders and civil wars
in every city; and all those that were at quiet from the Romans turned
their hands one against another. There was also a bitter contest between
those that were fond of war, and those that were desirous for peace. At
the first this quarrelsome temper caught hold of private families, who
could not agree among themselves; after which those people that were the
dearest to one another brake through all restraints with regard to each
other, and every one associated with those of his own opinion, and began
already to stand in opposition one to another; so that seditions arose
every where, while those that were for innovations, and were desirous of
war, by their youth and boldness, were too hard for the aged and prudent
men. And, in the first place, all the people of every place betook
themselves to rapine; after which they got together in bodies, in
order to rob the people of the country, insomuch that for barbarity and
iniquity those of the same nation did no way differ from the Romans;
nay, it seemed to be a much lighter thing to be ruined by the Romans
than by themselves.

3. Now the Roman garrisons, which guarded the cities, partly out of
their uneasiness to take such trouble upon them, and partly out of the
hatred they bare to the Jewish nation, did little or nothing towards
relieving the miserable, till the captains of these troops of robbers,
being satiated with rapines in the country, got all together from all
parts, and became a band of wickedness, and all together crept into
Jerusalem, which was now become a city without a governor, and, as the
ancient custom was, received without distinction all that belonged to
their nation; and these they then received, because all men supposed
that those who came so fast into the city came out of kindness, and for
their assistance, although these very men, besides the seditions they
raised, were otherwise the direct cause of the city's destruction also;
for as they were an unprofitable and a useless multitude, they spent
those provisions beforehand which might otherwise have been sufficient
for the fighting men. Moreover, besides the bringing on of the war, they
were the occasions of sedition and famine therein.

4. There were besides these other robbers that came out of the country,
and came into the city, and joining to them those that were worse than
themselves, omitted no kind of barbarity; for they did not measure their
courage by their rapines and plunderings only, but preceded as far as
murdering men; and this not in the night time or privately, or with
regard to ordinary men, but did it openly in the day time, and began
with the most eminent persons in the city; for the first man they
meddled with was Antipas, one of the royal lineage, and the most potent
man in the whole city, insomuch that the public treasures were committed
to his care; him they took and confined; as they did in the next place
to Levias, a person of great note, with Sophas, the son of Raguel, both
which were of royal lineage also. And besides these, they did the
same to the principal men of the country. This caused a terrible
consternation among the people, and everyone contented himself with
taking care of his own safety, as they would do if the city had been
taken in war.

5. But these were not satisfied with the bonds into which they had put
the men forementioned; nor did they think it safe for them to keep
them thus in custody long, since they were men very powerful, and had
numerous families of their own that were able to avenge them. Nay,
they thought the very people would perhaps be so moved at these unjust
proceedings, as to rise in a body against them; it was therefore
resolved to have them slain accordingly, they sent one John, who was the
most bloody-minded of them all, to do that execution: this man was also
called "the son of Dorcas," 3 in the language of our country. Ten more
men went along with him into the prison, with their swords drawn, and
so they cut the throats of those that were in custody there. The grand
lying pretence these men made for so flagrant an enormity was this,
that these men had had conferences with the Romans for a surrender of
Jerusalem to them; and so they said they had slain only such as were
traitors to their common liberty. Upon the whole, they grew the more
insolent upon this bold prank of theirs, as though they had been the
benefactors and saviors of the city.

6. Now the people were come to that degree of meanness and fear, and
these robbers to that degree of madness, that these last took upon them
to appoint high priests. 4 So when they had disannulled the succession,
according to those families out of which the high priests used to be
made, they ordained certain unknown and ignoble persons for that office,
that they might have their assistance in their wicked undertakings; for
such as obtained this highest of all honors, without any desert, were
forced to comply with those that bestowed it on them. They also set
the principal men at variance one with another, by several sorts of
contrivances and tricks, and gained the opportunity of doing what they
pleased, by the mutual quarrels of those who might have obstructed
their measures; till at length, when they were satiated with the unjust
actions they had done towards men, they transferred their contumelious
behavior to God himself, and came into the sanctuary with polluted feet.

7. And now the multitude were going to rise against them already; for
Ananus, the ancientest of the high priests, persuaded them to it. He was
a very prudent man, and had perhaps saved the city if he could but have
escaped the hands of those that plotted against him. These men made the
temple of God a strong hold for them, and a place whither they might
resort, in order to avoid the troubles they feared from the people;
the sanctuary was now become a refuge, and a shop of tyranny. They
also mixed jesting among the miseries they introduced, which was more
intolerable than what they did; for in order to try what surprise
the people would be under, and how far their own power extended, they
undertook to dispose of the high priesthood by casting lots for it,
whereas, as we have said already, it was to descend by succession in a
family. The pretense they made for this strange attempt was an ancient
practice, while they said that of old it was determined by lot; but in
truth, it was no better than a dissolution of an undeniable law, and
a cunning contrivance to seize upon the government, derived from those
that presumed to appoint governors as they themselves pleased.

8. Hereupon they sent for one of the pontifical tribes, which is called
Eniachim, 5 and cast lots which of it should be the high priest. By
fortune the lot so fell as to demonstrate their iniquity after the
plainest manner, for it fell upon one whose name was Phannias, the son
of Samuel, of the village Aphtha. He was a man not only unworthy of the
high priesthood, but that did not well know what the high priesthood
was, such a mere rustic was he! yet did they hail this man, without his
own consent, out of the country, as if they were acting a play upon the
stage, and adorned him with a counterfeit tree; they also put upon him
the sacred garments, and upon every occasion instructed him what he was
to do. This horrid piece of wickedness was sport and pastime with them,
but occasioned the other priests, who at a distance saw their law made
a jest of, to shed tears, and sorely lament the dissolution of such a
sacred dignity.

9. And now the people could no longer bear the insolence of this
procedure, but did all together run zealously, in order to overthrow
that tyranny; and indeed they were Gorion the son of Josephus, and
Symeon the son of Gamaliel, 6 who encouraged them, by going up and down
when they were assembled together in crowds, and as they saw them
alone, to bear no longer, but to inflict punishment upon these pests
and plagues of their freedom, and to purge the temple of these bloody
polluters of it. The best esteemed also of the high priests, Jesus the
son of Gamalas, and Ananus the son of Ananus when they were at their
assemblies, bitterly reproached the people for their sloth, and excited
them against the zealots; for that was the name they went by, as if they
were zealous in good undertakings, and were not rather zealous in the
worst actions, and extravagant in them beyond the example of others.

10. And now, when the multitude were gotten together to an assembly, and
every one was in indignation at these men's seizing upon the sanctuary,
at their rapine and murders, but had not yet begun their attacks upon
them, [the reason of which was this, that they imagined it to be a
difficult thing to suppress these zealots, as indeed the case was,]
Ananus stood in the midst of them, and casting his eyes frequently at
the temple, and having a flood of tears in his eyes, he said, "Certainly
it had been good for me to die before I had seen the house of God full
of so many abominations, or these sacred places, that ought not to be
trodden upon at random, filled with the feet of these blood-shedding
villains; yet do I, who am clothed with the vestments of the high
priesthood, and am called by that most venerable name [of high priest],
still live, and am but too fond of living, and cannot endure to undergo
a death which would be the glory of my old age; and if I were the only
person concerned, and as it were in a desert, I would give up my life,
and that alone for God's sake; for to what purpose is it to live among
a people insensible of their calamities, and where there is no notion
remaining of any remedy for the miseries that are upon them? for when
you are seized upon, you bear it! and when you are beaten, you are
silent! and when the people are murdered, nobody dare so much as send
out a groan openly! O bitter tyranny that we are under! But why do I
complain of the tyrants? Was it not you, and your sufferance of them,
that have nourished them? Was it not you that overlooked those that
first of all got together, for they were then but a few, and by your
silence made them grow to be many; and by conniving at them when they
took arms, in effect armed them against yourselves? You ought to have
then prevented their first attempts, when they fell a reproaching your
relations; but by neglecting that care in time, you have encouraged
these wretches to plunder men. When houses were pillaged, nobody said
a word, which was the occasion why they carried off the owners of those
houses; and when they were drawn through the midst of the city, nobody
came to their assistance. They then proceeded to put those whom you have
betrayed into their hands into bonds. I do not say how many and of what
characters those men were whom they thus served; but certainly they were
such as were accused by none, and condemned by none; and since nobody
succored them when they were put into bonds, the consequence was, that
you saw the same persons slain. We have seen this also; so that still
the best of the herd of brute animals, as it were, have been still led
to be sacrificed, when yet nobody said one word, or moved his right hand
for their preservation. Will you bear, therefore, will you bear to see
your sanctuary trampled on? and will you lay steps for these profane
wretches, upon which they may mount to higher degrees of insolence? Will
not you pluck them down from their exaltation? for even by this time
they had proceeded to higher enormities, if they had been able to
overthrow any thing greater than the sanctuary. They have seized upon
the strongest place of the whole city; you may call it the temple, if
you please, though it be like a citadel or fortress. Now, while you have
tyranny in so great a degree walled in, and see your enemies over your
heads, to what purpose is it to take counsel? and what have you to
support your minds withal? Perhaps you wait for the Romans, that they
may protect our holy places: are our matters then brought to that pass?
and are we come to that degree of misery, that our enemies themselves
are expected to pity us? O wretched creatures! will not you rise up and
turn upon those that strike you? which you may observe in wild beasts
themselves, that they will avenge themselves on those that strike
them. Will you not call to mind, every one of you, the calamities you
yourselves have suffered? nor lay before your eyes what afflictions you
yourselves have undergone? and will not such things sharpen your souls
to revenge? Is therefore that most honorable and most natural of our
passions utterly lost, I mean the desire of liberty? Truly we are in
love with slavery, and in love with those that lord it over us, as if
we had received that principle of subjection from our ancestors; yet did
they undergo many and great wars for the sake of liberty, nor were they
so far overcome by the power of the Egyptians, or the Medes, but that
still they did what they thought fit, notwithstanding their commands to
the contrary. And what occasion is there now for a war with the Romans?
[I meddle not with determining whether it be an advantageous and
profitable war or not.] What pretense is there for it? Is it not that
we may enjoy our liberty? Besides, shall we not bear the lords of the
habitable earth to be lords over us, and yet bear tyrants of our own
country? Although I must say that submission to foreigners may be borne,
because fortune hath already doomed us to it, while submission to wicked
people of our own nation is too unmanly, and brought upon us by our own
consent. However, since I have had occasion to mention the Romans, I
will not conceal a thing that, as I am speaking, comes into my mind, and
affects me considerably; it is this, that though we should be taken by
them, [God forbid the event should be so!] yet can we undergo nothing
that will be harder to be borne than what these men have already brought
upon us. How then can we avoid shedding of tears, when we see the Roman
donations in our temple, while we withal see those of our own nation
taking our spoils, and plundering our glorious metropolis, and
slaughtering our men, from which enormities those Romans themselves
would have abstained? to see those Romans never going beyond the bounds
allotted to profane persons, nor venturing to break in upon any of our
sacred customs; nay, having a horror on their minds when they view at a
distance those sacred walls; while some that have been born in this very
country, and brought up in our customs, and called Jews, do walk about
in the midst of the holy places, at the very time when their hands are
still warm with the slaughter of their own countrymen. Besides, can
any one be afraid of a war abroad, and that with such as will have
comparatively much greater moderation than our own people have? For
truly, if we may suit our words to the things they represent, it is
probable one may hereafter find the Romans to be the supporters of our
laws, and those within ourselves the subverters of them. And now I am
persuaded that every one of you here comes satisfied before I speak that
these overthrowers of our liberties deserve to be destroyed, and that
nobody can so much as devise a punishment that they have not deserved by
what they have done, and that you are all provoked against them by those
their wicked actions, whence you have suffered so greatly. But perhaps
many of you are affrighted at the multitude of those zealots, and at
their audaciousness, as well as at the advantage they have over us in
their being higher in place than we are; for these circumstances, as
they have been occasioned by your negligence, so will they become still
greater by being still longer neglected; for their multitude is every
day augmented, by every ill man's running away to those that are like to
themselves, and their audaciousness is therefore inflamed, because they
meet with no obstruction to their designs. And for their higher place,
they will make use of it for engines also, if we give them time to do
so; but be assured of this, that if we go up to fight them, they will
be made tamer by their own consciences, and what advantages they have in
the height of their situation they will lose by the opposition of their
reason; perhaps also God himself, who hath been affronted by them, will
make what they throw at us return against themselves, and these
impious wretches will be killed by their own darts: let us but make our
appearance before them, and they will come to nothing. However, it is a
right thing, if there should be any danger in the attempt, to die before
these holy gates, and to spend our very lives, if not for the sake of
our children and wives, yet for God's sake, and for the sake of his
sanctuary. I will assist you both with my counsel and with my hand; nor
shall any sagacity of ours be wanting for your support; nor shall you
see that I will be sparing of my body neither."

11. By these motives Ananus encouraged the multitude to go against the
zealots, although he knew how difficult it would be to disperse them,
because of their multitude, and their youth, and the courage of their
souls; but chiefly because of their consciousness of what they had done,
since they would not yield, as not so much as hoping for pardon at the
last for those their enormities. However, Ananus resolved to undergo
whatever sufferings might come upon him, rather than overlook things,
now they were in such great confusion. So the multitude cried out
to him, to lead them on against those whom he had described in his
exhortation to them, and every one of them was most readily disposed to
run any hazard whatsoever on that account.

12. Now while Ananus was choosing out his men, and putting those that
were proper for his purpose in array for fighting, the zealots got
information of his undertaking, [for there were some who went to them,
and told them all that the people were doing,] and were irritated at
it, and leaping out of the temple in crowds, and by parties, spared none
whom they met with. Upon this Ananus got the populace together on the
sudden, who were more numerous indeed than the zealots, but inferior
to them in arms, because they had not been regularly put into array for
fighting; but the alacrity that every body showed supplied all their
defects on both sides, the citizens taking up so great a passion as was
stronger than arms, and deriving a degree of courage from the temple
more forcible than any multitude whatsoever; and indeed these citizens
thought it was not possible for them to dwell in the city, unless they
could cut off the robbers that were in it. The zealots also thought that
unless they prevailed, there would be no punishment so bad but it
would be inflicted on them. So their conflicts were conducted by their
passions; and at the first they only cast stones at each other in the
city, and before the temple, and threw their javelins at a distance; but
when either of them were too hard for the other, they made use of their
swords; and great slaughter was made on both sides, and a great number
were wounded. As for the dead bodies of the people, their relations
carried them out to their own houses; but when any of the zealots were
wounded, he went up into the temple, and defiled that sacred floor
with his blood, insomuch that one may say it was their blood alone
that polluted our sanctuary. Now in these conflicts the robbers always
sallied out of the temple, and were too hard for their enemies; but
the populace grew very angry, and became more and more numerous, and
reproached those that gave back, and those behind would not afford room
to those that were going off, but forced them on again, till at length
they made their whole body to turn against their adversaries, and the
robbers could no longer oppose them, but were forced gradually to retire
into the temple; when Ananus and his party fell into it at the same time
together with them. 7 This horribly affrighted the robbers, because
it deprived them of the first court; so they fled into the inner court
immediately, and shut the gates. Now Ananus did not think fit to make
any attack against the holy gates, although the other threw their stones
and darts at them from above. He also deemed it unlawful to introduce
the multitude into that court before they were purified; he therefore
chose out of them all by lot six thousand armed men, and placed them as
guards in the cloisters; so there was a succession of such guards
one after another, and every one was forced to attend in his course;
although many of the chief of the city were dismissed by those that then
took on them the government, upon their hiring some of the poorer sort,
and sending them to keep the guard in their stead.

13. Now it was John who, as we told you, ran away from Gischala, and was
the occasion of all these being destroyed. He was a man of great craft,
and bore about him in his soul a strong passion after tyranny, and at
a distance was the adviser in these actions; and indeed at this time he
pretended to be of the people's opinion, and went all about with Ananus
when he consulted the great men every day, and in the night time also
when he went round the watch; but he divulged their secrets to the
zealots, and every thing that the people deliberated about was by his
means known to their enemies, even before it had been well agreed upon
by themselves. And by way of contrivance how he might not be brought
into suspicion, he cultivated the greatest friendship possible with
Ananus, and with the chief of the people; yet did this overdoing of his
turn against him, for he flattered them so extravagantly, that he was
but the more suspected; and his constant attendance every where, even
when he was not invited to be present, made him strongly suspected of
betraying their secrets to the enemy; for they plainly perceived
that they understood all the resolutions taken against them at their
consultations. Nor was there any one whom they had so much reason to
suspect of that discovery as this John; yet was it not easy to get quit
of him, so potent was he grown by his wicked practices. He was also
supported by many of those eminent men, who were to be consulted upon
all considerable affairs; it was therefore thought reasonable to oblige
him to give them assurance of his good-will upon oath; accordingly John
took such an oath readily, that he would be on the people's side, and
would not betray any of their counsels or practices to their enemies,
and would assist them in overthrowing those that attacked them, and that
both by his hand and his advice. So Ananus and his party believed his
oath, and did now receive him to their consultations without further
suspicion; nay, so far did they believe him, that they sent him as
their ambassador into the temple to the zealots, with proposals of
accommodation; for they were very desirous to avoid the pollution of the
temple as much as they possibly could, and that no one of their nation
should be slain therein.

14. But now this John, as if his oath had been made to the zealots, and
for confirmation of his good-will to them, and not against them, went
into the temple, and stood in the midst of them, and spake as follows:
That he had run many hazards on their accounts, and in order to let them
know of every thing that was secretly contrived against them by Ananus
and his party; but that both he and they should be cast into the most
imminent danger, unless some providential assistance were afforded them;
for that Ananus made no longer delay, but had prevailed with the people
to send ambassadors to Vespasian, to invite him to come presently and
take the city; and that he had appointed a fast for the next day against
them, that they might obtain admission into the temple on a religious
account, or gain it by force, and fight with them there; that he did not
see how long they could either endure a siege, or how they could fight
against so many enemies. He added further, that it was by the
providence of God he was himself sent as an ambassador to them for an
accommodation; for that Artanus did therefore offer them such proposals,
that he might come upon them when they were unarmed; that they ought
to choose one of these two methods, either to intercede with those that
guarded them, to save their lives, or to provide some foreign assistance
for themselves; that if they fostered themselves with the hopes of
pardon, in case they were subdued, they had forgotten what desperate
things they had done, or could suppose, that as soon as the actors
repented, those that had suffered by them must be presently reconciled
to them; while those that have done injuries, though they pretend to
repent of them, are frequently hated by the others for that sort of
repentance; and that the sufferers, when they get the power into their
hands, are usually still more severe upon the actors; that the friends
and kindred of those that had been destroyed would always be laying
plots against them; and that a large body of people were very angry
on account of their gross breaches of their laws, and [illegal]
judicatures, insomuch that although some part might commiserate them,
those would be quite overborne by the majority.






CHAPTER 4.


     The Idumeans Being Sent For By The Zealots, Came Immediately
     To Jerusalem; And When They Were Excluded Out Of The City,
     They Lay All Night There. Jesus One Of The High Priests
     Makes A Speech To Them; And Simon The Idumean Makes A Reply
     To It.

1. Now, by this crafty speech, John made the zealots afraid; yet durst
he not directly name what foreign assistance he meant, but in a covert
way only intimated at the Idumeans. But now, that he might particularly
irritate the leaders of the zealots, he calumniated Ananus, that he was
about a piece of barbarity, and did in a special manner threaten them.
These leaders were Eleazar, the son of Simon, who seemed the most
plausible man of them all, both in considering what was fit to be done,
and in the execution of what he had determined upon, and Zacharias, the
son of Phalek; both of whom derived their families from the priests.
Now when these two men had heard, not only the common threatenings which
belonged to them all, but those peculiarly leveled against themselves;
and besides, how Artanus and his party, in order to secure their own
dominion, had invited the Romans to come to them, for that also was
part of John's lie; they hesitated a great while what they should do,
considering the shortness of the time by which they were straitened;
because the people were prepared to attack them very soon, and because
the suddenness of the plot laid against them had almost cut off all
their hopes of getting any foreign assistance; for they might be under
the height of their afflictions before any of their confederates could
be informed of it. However, it was resolved to call in the Idumeans; so
they wrote a short letter to this effect: That Ananus had imposed on
the people, and was betraying their metropolis to the Romans; that
they themselves had revolted from the rest, and were in custody in the
temple, on account of the preservation of their liberty; that there was
but a small time left wherein they might hope for their deliverance; and
that unless they would come immediately to their assistance, they should
themselves be soon in the power of Artanus, and the city would be in the
power of the Romans. They also charged the messengers to tell many more
circumstances to the rulers of the Idumeans. Now there were two active
men proposed for the carrying this message, and such as were able to
speak, and to persuade them that things were in this posture, and, what
was a qualification still more necessary than the former, they were very
swift of foot; for they knew well enough that these would immediately
comply with their desires, as being ever a tumultuous and disorderly
nation, always on the watch upon every motion, delighting in mutations;
and upon your flattering them ever so little, and petitioning them, they
soon take their arms, and put themselves into motion, and make haste to
a battle, as if it were to a feast. There was indeed occasion for quick
despatch in the carrying of this message, in which point the messengers
were no way defective. Both their names were Ananias; and they soon came
to the rulers of the Idumeans.

2. Now these rulers were greatly surprised at the contents of the
letter, and at what those that came with it further told them; whereupon
they ran about the nation like madmen, and made proclamation that the
people should come to war; so a multitude was suddenly got together,
sooner indeed than the time appointed in the proclamation, and every
body caught up their arms, in order to maintain the liberty of their
metropolis; and twenty thousand of them were put into battle-array, and
came to Jerusalem, under four commanders, John, and Jacob the son of
Sosas; and besides these were Simon, the son of Cathlas, and Phineas,
the son of Clusothus.

3. Now this exit of the messengers was not known either to Ananus or to
the guards, but the approach of the Idumeans was known to him; for as
he knew of it before they came, he ordered the gates to be shut against
them, and that the walls should be guarded. Yet did not he by any means
think of fighting against them, but, before they came to blows, to try
what persuasions would do. Accordingly, Jesus, the eldest of the high
priests next to Artanus, stood upon the tower that was over against
them, and said thus: "Many troubles indeed, and those of various kinds,
have fallen upon this city, yet in none of them have I so much wondered
at her fortune as now, when you are come to assist wicked men, and
this after a manner very extraordinary; for I see that you are come to
support the vilest of men against us, and this with so great alacrity,
as you could hardly put on the like, in case our metropolis had called
you to her assistance against barbarians. And if I had perceived that
your army was composed of men like unto those who invited them, I had
not deemed your attempt so absurd; for nothing does so much cement the
minds of men together as the alliance there is between their manners.
But now for these men who have invited you, if you were to examine
them one by one, every one of them would be found to have deserved ten
thousand deaths; for the very rascality and offscouring of the whole
country, who have spent in debauchery their own substance, and, by way
of trial beforehand, have madly plundered the neighboring villages and
cities, in the upshot of all, have privately run together into this holy
city. They are robbers, who by their prodigious wickedness have profaned
this most sacred floor, and who are to be now seen drinking themselves
drunk in the sanctuary, and expending the spoils of those whom they have
slaughtered upon their unsatiable bellies. As for the multitude that
is with you, one may see them so decently adorned in their armor, as
it would become them to be had their metropolis called them to her
assistance against foreigners. What can a man call this procedure of
yours but the sport of fortune, when he sees a whole nation coming to
protect a sink of wicked wretches? I have for a good while been in doubt
what it could possibly be that should move you to do this so suddenly;
because certainly you would not take on your armor on the behalf of
robbers, and against a people of kin to you, without some very great
cause for your so doing. But we have an item that the Romans are
pretended, and that we are supposed to be going to betray this city
to them; for some of your men have lately made a clamor about those
matters, and have said they are come to set their metropolis free. Now
we cannot but admire at these wretches in their devising such a lie
as this against us; for they knew there was no other way to irritate
against us men that were naturally desirous of liberty, and on that
account the best disposed to fight against foreign enemies, but by
framing a tale as if we were going to betray that most desirable thing,
liberty. But you ought to consider what sort of people they are that
raise this calumny, and against what sort of people that calumny is
raised, and to gather the truth of things, not by fictitious speeches,
but out of the actions of both parties; for what occasion is there for
us to sell ourselves to the Romans, while it was in our power not to
have revolted from them at the first, or when we had once revolted, to
have returned under their dominion again, and this while the neighboring
countries were not yet laid waste? whereas it is not an easy thing to
be reconciled to the Romans, if we were desirous of it, now they have
subdued Galilee, and are thereby become proud and insolent; and to
endeavor to please them at the time when they are so near us, would
bring such a reproach upon us as were worse than death. As for myself,
indeed, I should have preferred peace with them before death; but now we
have once made war upon them, and fought with them, I prefer death, with
reputation, before living in captivity under them. But further, whether
do they pretend that we, who are the rulers of the people, have sent
thus privately to the Romans, or hath it been done by the common
suffrages of the people? If it be ourselves only that have done it, let
them name those friends of ours that have been sent, as our servants, to
manage this treachery. Hath any one been caught as he went out on this
errand, or seized upon as he came back? Are they in possession of our
letters? How could we be concealed from such a vast number of our fellow
citizens, among whom we are conversant every hour, while what is done
privately in the country is, it seems, known by the zealots, who are but
few in number, and under confinement also, and are not able to come out
of the temple into the city. Is this the first time that they are become
sensible how they ought to be punished for their insolent actions? For
while these men were free from the fear they are now under, there was
no suspicion raised that any of us were traitors. But if they lay
this charge against the people, this must have been done at a public
consultation, and not one of the people must have dissented from the
rest of the assembly; in which case the public fame of this matter would
have come to you sooner than any particular indication. But how could
that be? Must there not then have been ambassadors sent to confirm
the agreements? And let them tell us who this ambassador was that was
ordained for that purpose. But this is no other than a pretense of such
men as are loath to die, and are laboring to escape those punishments
that hang over them; for if fate had determined that this city was to be
betrayed into its enemies' hands, no other than these men that accuse
us falsely could have the impudence to do it, there being no wickedness
wanting to complete their impudent practices but this only, that they
become traitors. And now you Idumeans are come hither already with
your arms, it is your duty, in the first place, to be assisting to your
metropolis, and to join with us in cutting off those tyrants that have
infringed the rules of our regular tribunals, that have trampled upon
our laws, and made their swords the arbitrators of right and wrong; for
they have seized upon men of great eminence, and under no accusation,
as they stood in the midst of the market-place, and tortured them with
putting them into bonds, and, without bearing to hear what they had to
say, or what supplications they made, they destroyed them. You may, if
you please, come into the city, though not in the way of war, and take
a view of the marks still remaining of what I now say, and may see the
houses that have been depopulated by their rapacious hands, with those
wives and families that are in black, mourning for their slaughtered
relations; as also you may hear their groans and lamentations all the
city over; for there is nobody but hath tasted of the incursions of
these profane wretches, who have proceeded to that degree of madness,
as not only to have transferred their impudent robberies out of the
country, and the remote cities, into this city, the very face and head
of the whole nation, but out of the city into the temple also; for that
is now made their receptacle and refuge, and the fountain-head whence
their preparations are made against us. And this place, which is adored
by the habitable world, and honored by such as only know it by report,
as far as the ends of the earth, is trampled upon by these wild beasts
born among ourselves. They now triumph in the desperate condition they
are already in, when they hear that one people is going to fight against
another people, and one city against another city, and that your nation
hath gotten an army together against its own bowels. Instead of which
procedure, it were highly fit and reasonable, as I said before, for you
to join with us in cutting off these wretches, and in particular to
be revenged on them for putting this very cheat upon you; I mean, for
having the impudence to invite you to assist them, of whom they ought to
have stood in fear, as ready to punish them. But if you have some regard
to these men's invitation of you, yet may you lay aside your arms, and
come into the city under the notion of our kindred, and take upon you
a middle name between that of auxiliaries and of enemies, and so become
judges in this case. However, consider what these men will gain by being
called into judgment before you, for such undeniable and such flagrant
crimes, who would not vouchsafe to hear such as had no accusations laid
against them to speak a word for themselves. However, let them gain this
advantage by your coming. But still, if you will neither take our part
in that indignation we have at these men, nor judge between us, the
third thing I have to propose is this, that you let us both alone,
and neither insult upon our calamities, nor abide with these plotters
against their metropolis; for though you should have ever so great a
suspicion that some of us have discoursed with the Romans, it is in your
power to watch the passages into the city; and in case any thing that we
have been accused of is brought to light, then to come and defend your
metropolis, and to inflict punishment on those that are found guilty;
for the enemy cannot prevent you who are so near to the city. But if,
after all, none of these proposals seem acceptable and moderate, do not
you wonder that the gates are shut against you, while you bear your arms
about you."

4. Thus spake Jesus; yet did not the multitude of the Idumeans give any
attention to what he said, but were in a rage, because they did not meet
with a ready entrance into the city. The generals also had indignation
at the offer of laying down their arms, and looked upon it as equal to
a captivity, to throw them away at any man's injunction whomsoever.
But Simon, the son of Cathlas, one of their commanders, with much ado
quieted the tumult of his own men, and stood so that the high priests
might hear him, and said as follows: "I can no longer wonder that the
patrons of liberty are under custody in the temple, since there are
those that shut the gates of our common city 8 to their own nation, and
at the same time are prepared to admit the Romans into it; nay, perhaps
are disposed to crown the gates with garlands at their coming, while
they speak to the Idumeans from their own towers, and enjoin them to
throw down their arms which they have taken up for the preservation of
its liberty. And while they will not intrust the guard of our metropolis
to their kindred, profess to make them judges of the differences that
are among them; nay, while they accuse some men of having slain others
without a legal trial, they do themselves condemn a whole nation after
an ignominious manner, and have now walled up that city from their
own nation, which used to be open to even all foreigners that came to
worship there. We have indeed come in great haste to you, and to a war
against our own countrymen; and the reason why we have made such haste
is this, that we may preserve that freedom which you are so unhappy
as to betray. You have probably been guilty of the like crimes against
those whom you keep in custody, and have, I suppose, collected together
the like plausible pretenses against them also that you make use of
against us; after which you have gotten the mastery of those within the
temple, and keep them in custody, while they are only taking care of
the public affairs. You have also shut the gates of the city in general
against nations that are the most nearly related to you; and while you
give such injurious commands to others, you complain that you have been
tyrannized over by them, and fix the name of unjust governors upon such
as are tyrannized over by yourselves. Who can bear this your abuse of
words, while they have a regard to the contrariety of your actions,
unless you mean this, that those Idumeans do now exclude you out of
your metropolis, whom you exclude from the sacred offices of your own
country? One may indeed justly complain of those that are besieged in
the temple, that when they had courage enough to punish those tyrants
whom you call eminent men, and free from any accusations, because of
their being your companions in wickedness, they did not begin with you,
and thereby cut off beforehand the most dangerous parts of this treason.
But if these men have been more merciful than the public necessity
required, we that are Idumeans will preserve this house of God, and will
fight for our common country, and will oppose by war as well those that
attack them from abroad, as those that betray them from within. Here
will we abide before the walls in our armor, until either the Romans
grow weary in waiting for you, or you become friends to liberty, and
repent of what you have done against it."

5. And now did the Idumeans make an acclamation to what Simon had said;
but Jesus went away sorrowful, as seeing that the Idumeans were against
all moderate counsels, and that the city was besieged on both sides. Nor
indeed were the minds of the Idumeans at rest; for they were in a rage
at the injury that had been offered them by their exclusion out of the
city; and when they thought the zealots had been strong, but saw nothing
of theirs to support them, they were in doubt about the matter, and many
of them repented that they had come thither. But the shame that would
attend them in case they returned without doing any thing at all, so far
overcame that their repentance, that they lay all night before the wall,
though in a very bad encampment; for there broke out a prodigious storm
in the night, with the utmost violence, and very strong winds, with
the largest showers of rain, with continued lightnings, terrible
thunderings, and amazing concussions and bellowings of the earth, that
was in an earthquake. These things were a manifest indication that some
destruction was coming upon men, when the system of the world was
put into this disorder; and any one would guess that these wonders
foreshowed some grand calamities that were coming.

6. Now the opinion of the Idumeans and of the citizens was one and the
same. The Idumeans thought that God was angry at their taking arms, and
that they would not escape punishment for their making war upon their
metropolis. Ananus and his party thought that they had conquered without
fighting, and that God acted as a general for them; but truly they
proved both ill conjectures at what was to come, and made those events
to be ominous to their enemies, while they were themselves to undergo
the ill effects of them; for the Idumeans fenced one another by uniting
their bodies into one band, and thereby kept themselves warm, and
connecting their shields over their heads, were not so much hurt by the
rain. But the zealots were more deeply concerned for the danger these
men were in than they were for themselves, and got together, and looked
about them to see whether they could devise any means of assisting them.
The hotter sort of them thought it best to force their guards with their
arms, and after that to fall into the midst of the city, and publicly
open the gates to those that came to their assistance; as supposing the
guards would be in disorder, and give way at such an unexpected attempt
of theirs, especially as the greater part of them were unarmed and
unskilled in the affairs of war; and that besides the multitude of the
citizens would not be easily gathered together, but confined to
their houses by the storm: and that if there were any hazard in their
undertaking, it became them to suffer any thing whatsoever themselves,
rather than to overlook so great a multitude as were miserably perishing
on their account. But the more prudent part of them disapproved of this
forcible method, because they saw not only the guards about them very
numerous, but the walls of the city itself carefully watched, by reason
of the Idumeans. They also supposed that Ananus would be every where,
and visit the guards every hour; which indeed was done upon other
nights, but was omitted that night, not by reason of any slothfulness
of Ananus, but by the overbearing appointment of fate, that so both he
might himself perish, and the multitude of the guards might perish with
him; for truly, as the night was far gone, and the storm very terrible,
Ananus gave the guards in the cloisters leave to go to sleep; while it
came into the heads of the zealots to make use of the saws belonging to
the temple, and to cut the bars of the gates to pieces. The noise of the
wind, and that not inferior sound of the thunder, did here also conspire
with their designs, that the noise of the saws was not heard by the
others.

7. So they secretly went out of the temple to the wall of the city, and
made use of their saws, and opened that gate which was over against the
Idumeans. Now at first there came a fear upon the Idumeans themselves,
which disturbed them, as imagining that Ananus and his party were coming
to attack them, so that every one of them had his right hand upon his
sword, in order to defend himself; but they soon came to know who they
were that came to them, and were entered the city. And had the Idumeans
then fallen upon the city, nothing could have hindered them from
destroying the people every man of them, such was the rage they were in
at that time; but as they first of all made haste to get the zealots out
of custody, which those that brought them in earnestly desired them to
do, and not to overlook those for whose sakes they were come, in the
midst of their distresses, nor to bring them into a still greater
danger; for that when they had once seized upon the guards, it would
be easy for them to fall upon the city; but that if the city were once
alarmed, they would not then be able to overcome those guards, because
as soon as they should perceive they were there, they would put
themselves in order to fight them, and would hinder their coming into
the temple.






CHAPTER V.


     The Cruelty Of The Idumeans When They Were Gotten Into The
     Temple During The Storm; And Of The Zealots. Concerning The
     Slaughter Of Ananus, And Jesus, And Zacharias; And How The
     Idumeans Retired Home.

1. This advice pleased the Idumeans, and they ascended through the
city to the temple. The zealots were also in great expectation of
their coming, and earnestly waited for them. When therefore these were
entering, they also came boldly out of the inner temple, and mixing
themselves among the Idumeans, they attacked the guards; and some of
those that were upon the watch, but were fallen asleep, they killed as
they were asleep; but as those that were now awakened made a cry, the
whole multitude arose, and in the amazement they were in caught hold of
their arms immediately, and betook themselves to their own defense; and
so long as they thought they were only the zealots who attacked them,
they went on boldly, as hoping to overpower them by their numbers; but
when they saw others pressing in upon them also, they perceived the
Idumeans were got in; and the greatest part of them laid aside
their arms, together with their courage, and betook themselves to
lamentations. But some few of the younger sort covered themselves
with their armor, and valiantly received the Idumeans, and for a while
protected the multitude of old men. Others, indeed, gave a signal to
those that were in the city of the calamities they were in; but when
these were also made sensible that the Idumeans were come in, none of
them durst come to their assistance, only they returned the terrible
echo of wailing, and lamented their misfortunes. A great howling of the
women was excited also, and every one of the guards were in danger
of being killed. The zealots also joined in the shouts raised by the
Idumeans; and the storm itself rendered the cry more terrible; nor did
the Idumeans spare any body; for as they are naturally a most barbarous
and bloody nation, and had been distressed by the tempest, they made use
of their weapons against those that had shut the gates against them, and
acted in the same manner as to those that supplicated for their lives,
and to those that fought them, insomuch that they ran through those with
their swords who desired them to remember the relation there was between
them, and begged of them to have regard to their common temple. Now
there was at present neither any place for flight, nor any hope of
preservation; but as they were driven one upon another in heaps, so
were they slain. Thus the greater part were driven together by force, as
there was now no place of retirement, and the murderers were upon them;
and, having no other way, threw themselves down headlong into the city;
whereby, in my opinion, they underwent a more miserable destruction than
that which they avoided, because that was a voluntary one. And now the
outer temple was all of it overflowed with blood; and that day, as it
came on, they saw eight thousand five hundred dead bodies there.

2. But the rage of the Idumeans was not satiated by these slaughters;
but they now betook themselves to the city, and plundered every house,
and slew every one they met; and for the other multitude, they esteemed
it needless to go on with killing them, but they sought for the high
priests, and the generality went with the greatest zeal against them;
and as soon as they caught them they slew them, and then standing upon
their dead bodies, in way of jest, upbraided Ananus with his kindness to
the people, and Jesus with his speech made to them from the wall. Nay,
they proceeded to that degree of impiety, as to cast away their dead
bodies without burial, although the Jews used to take so much care of
the burial of men, that they took down those that were condemned and
crucified, and buried them before the going down of the sun. I should
not mistake if I said that the death of Ananus was the beginning of the
destruction of the city, and that from this very day may be dated the
overthrow of her wall, and the ruin of her affairs, whereon they saw
their high priest, and the procurer of their preservation, slain in the
midst of their city. He was on other accounts also a venerable, and a
very just man; and besides the grandeur of that nobility, and dignity,
and honor of which he was possessed, he had been a lover of a kind
of parity, even with regard to the meanest of the people; he was
a prodigious lover of liberty, and an admirer of a democracy in
government; and did ever prefer the public welfare before his own
advantage, and preferred peace above all things; for he was thoroughly
sensible that the Romans were not to be conquered. He also foresaw
that of necessity a war would follow, and that unless the Jews made up
matters with them very dexterously, they would be destroyed; to say
all in a word, if Ananus had survived, they had certainly compounded
matters; for he was a shrewd man in speaking and persuading the people,
and had already gotten the mastery of those that opposed his designs, or
were for the war. And the Jews had then put abundance of delays in the
way of the Romans, if they had had such a general as he was. Jesus
was also joined with him; and although he was inferior to him upon the
comparison, he was superior to the rest; and I cannot but think that it
was because God had doomed this city to destruction, as a polluted city,
and was resolved to purge his sanctuary by fire, that he cut off these
their great defenders and well-wishers, while those that a little before
had worn the sacred garments, and had presided over the public worship;
and had been esteemed venerable by those that dwelt on the whole
habitable earth when they came into our city, were cast out naked, and
seen to be the food of dogs and wild beasts. And I cannot but imagine
that virtue itself groaned at these men's case, and lamented that she
was here so terribly conquered by wickedness. And this at last was the
end of Ananus and Jesus.

3. Now after these were slain, the zealots and the multitude of the
Idumeans fell upon the people as upon a flock of profane animals, and
cut their throats; and for the ordinary sort, they were destroyed in
what place soever they caught them. But for the noblemen and the youth,
they first caught them and bound them, and shut them up in prison, and
put off their slaughter, in hopes that some of them would turn over to
their party; but not one of them would comply with their desires, but
all of them preferred death before being enrolled among such wicked
wretches as acted against their own country. But this refusal of theirs
brought upon them terrible torments; for they were so scourged and
tortured, that their bodies were not able to sustain their torments,
till at length, and with difficulty, they had the favor to be slain.
Those whom they caught in the day time were slain in the night, and then
their bodies were carried out and thrown away, that there might be room
for other prisoners; and the terror that was upon the people was so
great, that no one had courage enough either to weep openly for the dead
man that was related to him, or to bury him; but those that were shut up
in their own houses could only shed tears in secret, and durst not even
groan without great caution, lest any of their enemies should hear them;
for if they did, those that mourned for others soon underwent the same
death with those whom they mourned for. Only in the night time they
would take up a little dust, and throw it upon their bodies; and even
some that were the most ready to expose themselves to danger would do it
in the day time: and there were twelve thousand of the better sort who
perished in this manner.

4. And now these zealots and Idumeans were quite weary of barely killing
men, so they had the impudence of setting up fictitious tribunals and
judicatures for that purpose; and as they intended to have Zacharias 9
the son of Baruch, one of the most eminent of the citizens, slain, so
what provoked them against him was, that hatred of wickedness and love
of liberty which were so eminent in him: he was also a rich man, so that
by taking him off, they did not only hope to seize his effects, but
also to get rid of a mall that had great power to destroy them. So they
called together, by a public proclamation, seventy of the principal men
of the populace, for a show, as if they were real judges, while they had
no proper authority. Before these was Zacharias accused of a design
to betray their polity to the Romans, and having traitorously sent to
Vespasian for that purpose. Now there appeared no proof or sign of
what he was accused; but they affirmed themselves that they were well
persuaded that so it was, and desired that such their affirmation might
be taken for sufficient evidence. Now when Zacharias clearly saw that
there was no way remaining for his escape from them, as having been
treacherously called before them, and then put in prison, but not with
any intention of a legal trial, he took great liberty of speech in that
despair of his life he was under. Accordingly he stood up, and laughed
at their pretended accusation, and in a few words confuted the crimes
laid to his charge; after which he turned his speech to his accusers,
and went over distinctly all their transgressions of the law, and made
heavy lamentation upon the confusion they had brought public affairs
to: in the mean time, the zealots grew tumultuous, and had much ado to
abstain from drawing their swords, although they designed to preserve
the appearance and show of judicature to the end. They were also
desirous, on other accounts, to try the judges, whether they would be
mindful of what was just at their own peril. Now the seventy judges
brought in their verdict that the person accused was not guilty, as
choosing rather to die themselves with him, than to have his death laid
at their doors; hereupon there arose a great clamor of the zealots
upon his acquittal, and they all had indignation at the judges for not
understanding that the authority that was given them was but in jest.
So two of the boldest of them fell upon Zacharias in the middle of the
temple, and slew him; and as he fell down dead, they bantered him,
and said, "Thou hast also our verdict, and this will prove a more sure
acquittal to thee than the other." They also threw him down from the
temple immediately into the valley beneath it. Moreover, they struck the
judges with the backs of their swords, by way of abuse, and thrust them
out of the court of the temple, and spared their lives with no other
design than that, when they were dispersed among the people in the city,
they might become their messengers, to let them know they were no better
than slaves.

5. But by this time the Idumeans repented of their coming, and were
displeased at what had been done; and when they were assembled together
by one of the zealots, who had come privately to them, he declared
to them what a number of wicked pranks they had themselves done in
conjunction with those that invited them, and gave a particular account
of what mischiefs had been done against their metropolis. He said that
they had taken arms, as though the high priests were betraying their
metropolis to the Romans, but had found no indication of any such
treachery; but that they had succored those that had pretended to
believe such a thing, while they did themselves the works of war and
tyranny, after an insolent manner. It had been indeed their business to
have hindered them from such their proceedings at the first, but seeing
they had once been partners with them in shedding the blood of their
own countrymen, it was high time to put a stop to such crimes, and not
continue to afford any more assistance to such as are subverting the
laws of their forefathers; for that if any had taken it ill that the
gates had been shut against them, and they had not been permitted to
come into the city, yet that those who had excluded them have been
punished, and Ananus is dead, and that almost all those people had been
destroyed in one night's time. That one may perceive many of themselves
now repenting for what they had done, and might see the horrid barbarity
of those that had invited them, and that they had no regard to such as
had saved them; that they were so impudent as to perpetrate the vilest
things, under the eyes of those that had supported them, and that their
wicked actions would be laid to the charge of the Idumeans, and would
be so laid to their charge till somebody obstructs their proceedings, or
separates himself from the same wicked action; that they therefore ought
to retire home, since the imputation of treason appears to be a Calumny,
and that there was no expectation of the coming of the Romans at this
time, and that the government of the city was secured by such walls as
cannot easily be thrown down; and, by avoiding any further fellowship
with these bad men, to make some excuse for themselves, as to what they
had been so far deluded, as to have been partners with them hitherto.






CHAPTER 6.


     How The Zealots When They Were Freed From The Idumeans, Slew
     A Great Many More Of The Citizens; And How Vespasian
     Dissuaded The Romans When They Were Very Earnest To March
     Against The Jews From Proceeding In The War At That Time.

1. The Idumeans complied with these persuasions; and, in the first
place, they set those that were in the prisons at liberty, being about
two thousand of the populace, who thereupon fled away immediately to
Simon, one whom we shall speak of presently. After which these Idumeans
retired from Jerusalem, and went home; which departure of theirs was
a great surprise to both parties; for the people, not knowing of their
repentance, pulled up their courage for a while, as eased of so many of
their enemies, while the zealots grew more insolent not as deserted by
their confederates, but as freed from such men as might hinder their
designs, and plot some stop to their wickedness. Accordingly, they
made no longer any delay, nor took any deliberation in their enormous
practices, but made use of the shortest methods for all their executions
and what they had once resolved upon, they put in practice sooner than
any one could imagine. But their thirst was chiefly after the blood
of valiant men, and men of good families; the one sort of which they
destroyed out of envy, the other out of fear; for they thought their
whole security lay in leaving no potent men alive; on which account they
slew Gorion, a person eminent in dignity, and on account of his family
also; he was also for democracy, and of as great boldness and freedom
of spirit as were any of the Jews whosoever; the principal thing that
ruined him, added to his other advantages, was his free speaking. Nor
did Niger of Peres escape their hands; he had been a man of great valor
in their war with the Romans, but was now drawn through the middle of
the city, and, as he went, he frequently cried out, and showed the scars
of his wounds; and when he was drawn out of the gates, and despaired of
his preservation, he besought them to grant him a burial; but as they
had threatened him beforehand not to grant him any spot of earth for a
grave, which he chiefly desired of them, so did they slay him [without
permitting him to be buried]. Now when they were slaying him, he made
this imprecation upon them, that they might undergo both famine and
pestilence in this war, and besides all that, they might come to the
mutual slaughter of one another; all which imprecations God confirmed
against these impious men, and was what came most justly upon them,
when not long afterward they tasted of their own madness in their mutual
seditions one against another. So when this Niger was killed, their
fears of being overturned were diminished; and indeed there was no part
of the people but they found out some pretense to destroy them; for
some were therefore slain, because they had had differences with some of
them; and as to those that had not opposed them in times of peace, they
watched seasonable opportunities to gain some accusation against
them; and if any one did not come near them at all, he was under their
suspicion as a proud man; if any one came with boldness, he was esteemed
a contemner of them; and if any one came as aiming to oblige them, he
was supposed to have some treacherous plot against them; while the only
punishment of crimes, whether they were of the greatest or smallest
sort, was death. Nor could any one escape, unless he were very
inconsiderable, either on account of the meanness of his birth, or on
account of his fortune.

2. And now all the rest of the commanders of the Romans deemed this
sedition among their enemies to be of great advantage to them, and were
very earnest to march to the city, and they urged Vespasian, as their
lord and general in all cases, to make haste, and said to him, that "the
providence of God is on our side, by setting our enemies at variance
against one another; that still the change in such cases may be sudden,
and the Jews may quickly be at one again, either because they may be
tired out with their civil miseries, or repent them of such doings." But
Vespasian replied, that they were greatly mistaken in what they thought
fit to be done, as those that, upon the theater, love to make a show
of their hands, and of their weapons, but do it at their own hazard,
without considering, what was for their advantage, and for their
security; for that if they now go and attack the city immediately, "they
shall but occasion their enemies to unite together, and shall convert
their force, now it is in its height, against themselves. But if they
stay a while, they shall have fewer enemies, because they will be
consumed in this sedition: that God acts as a general of the Romans
better than he can do, and is giving the Jews up to them without any
pains of their own, and granting their army a victory without any
danger; that therefore it is their best way, while their enemies
are destroying each other with their own hands, and falling into the
greatest of misfortunes, which is that of sedition, to sit still as
spectators of the dangers they run into, rather than to fight hand to
hand with men that love murdering, and are mad one against another. But
if any one imagines that the glory of victory, when it is gotten without
fighting, will be more insipid, let him know this much, that a glorious
success, quietly obtained, is more profitable than the dangers of
a battle; for we ought to esteem these that do what is agreeable to
temperance and prudence no less glorious than those that have gained
great reputation by their actions in war: that he shall lead on his army
with greater force when their enemies are diminished, and his own army
refreshed after the continual labors they had undergone. However, that
this is not a proper time to propose to ourselves the glory of victory;
for that the Jews are not now employed in making of armor or building of
walls, nor indeed in getting together auxiliaries, while the advantage
will be on their side who give them such opportunity of delay; but
that the Jews are vexed to pieces every day by their civil wars and
dissensions, and are under greater miseries than, if they were once
taken, could be inflicted on them by us. Whether therefore any one
hath regard to what is for our safety, he ought to suffer these Jews to
destroy one another; or whether he hath regard to the greater glory of
the action, we ought by no means to meddle with those men, now they are
afflicted with a distemper at home; for should we now conquer them, it
would be said the conquest was not owing to our bravery, but to their
sedition." 10

3. And now the commanders joined in their approbation of what Vespasian
had said, and it was soon discovered how wise an opinion he had given.
And indeed many there were of the Jews that deserted every day, and fled
away from the zealots, although their flight was very difficult, since
they had guarded every passage out of the city, and slew every one that
was caught at them, as taking it for granted they were going over to the
Romans; yet did he who gave them money get clear off, while he only that
gave them none was voted a traitor. So the upshot was this, that the
rich purchased their flight by money, while none but the poor were
slain. Along all the roads also vast numbers of dead bodies lay in
heaps, and even many of those that were so zealous in deserting at
length chose rather to perish within the city; for the hopes of burial
made death in their own city appear of the two less terrible to them.
But these zealots came at last to that degree of barbarity, as not to
bestow a burial either on those slain in the city, or on those that lay
along the roads; but as if they had made an agreement to cancel both the
laws of their country and the laws of nature, and, at the same time
that they defiled men with their wicked actions, they would pollute the
Divinity itself also, they left the dead bodies to putrefy under the
sun; and the same punishment was allotted to such as buried any as
to those that deserted, which was no other than death; while he that
granted the favor of a grave to another would presently stand in need
of a grave himself. To say all in a word, no other gentle passion was so
entirely lost among them as mercy; for what were the greatest objects of
pity did most of all irritate these wretches, and they transferred their
rage from the living to those that had been slain, and from the dead
to the living. Nay, the terror was so very great, that he who survived
called them that were first dead happy, as being at rest already; as did
those that were under torture in the prisons, declare, that, upon
this comparison, those that lay unburied were the happiest. These men,
therefore, trampled upon all the laws of men, and laughed at the laws
of God; and for the oracles of the prophets, they ridiculed them as
the tricks of jugglers; yet did these prophets foretell many things
concerning [the rewards of] virtue, and [punishments of] vice, which
when these zealots violated, they occasioned the fulfilling of those
very prophecies belonging to their own country; for there was a certain
ancient oracle of those men, that the city should then be taken and
the sanctuary burnt, by right of war, when a sedition should invade the
Jews, and their own hand should pollute the temple of God. Now while
these zealots did not [quite] disbelieve these predictions, they made
themselves the instruments of their accomplishment.






CHAPTER 7.


     How John Tyrannized Over The Rest; And What Mischiefs The
     Zealots Did At Masada. How Also Vespasian Took Gadara; And
     What Actions Were Performed By Placidus.

1. By this time John was beginning to tyrannize, and thought it beneath
him to accept of barely the same honors that others had; and joining to
himself by degrees a party of the wickedest of them all, he broke
off from the rest of the faction. This was brought about by his still
disagreeing with the opinions of others, and giving out injunctions
of his own, in a very imperious manner; so that it was evident he was
setting up a monarchical power. Now some submitted to him out of their
fear of him, and others out of their good-will to him; for he was a
shrewd man to entice men to him, both by deluding them and putting
cheats upon them. Nay, many there were that thought they should be safer
themselves, if the causes of their past insolent actions should now be
reduced to one head, and not to a great many. His activity was so great,
and that both in action and in counsel, that he had not a few guards
about him; yet was there a great party of his antagonists that left him;
among whom envy at him weighed a great deal, while they thought it a
very heavy thing to be in subjection to one that was formerly their
equal. But the main reason that moved men against him was the dread of
monarchy, for they could not hope easily to put an end to his power,
if he had once obtained it; and yet they knew that he would have this
pretense always against them, that they had opposed him when he was
first advanced; while every one chose rather to suffer any thing
whatsoever in war, than that, when they had been in a voluntary slavery
for some time, they should afterward perish. So the sedition was divided
into two parts, and John reigned in opposition to his adversaries over
one of them: but for their leaders, they watched one another, nor
did they at all, or at least very little, meddle with arms in their
quarrels; but they fought earnestly against the people, and contended
one with another which of them should bring home the greatest prey. But
because the city had to struggle with three of the greatest misfortunes,
war, and tyranny, and sedition, it appeared, upon the comparison,
that the war was the least troublesome to the populace of them all.
Accordingly, they ran away from their own houses to foreigners, and
obtained that preservation from the Romans which they despaired to
obtain among their own people.

2. And now a fourth misfortune arose, in order to bring our nation to
destruction. There was a fortress of very great strength not far
from Jerusalem, which had been built by our ancient kings, both as
a repository for their effects in the hazards of war, and for the
preservation of their bodies at the same time. It was called Masada.
Those that were called Sicarii had taken possession of it formerly,
but at this time they overran the neighboring countries, aiming only
to procure to themselves necessaries; for the fear they were then in
prevented their further ravages. But when once they were informed
that the Roman army lay still, and that the Jews were divided between
sedition and tyranny, they boldly undertook greater matters; and at the
feast of unleavened bread, which the Jews celebrate in memory of their
deliverance from the Egyptian bondage, when they were sent back into
the country of their forefathers, they came down by night, without
being discovered by those that could have prevented them, and overran a
certain small city called Engaddi:--in which expedition they prevented
those citizens that could have stopped them, before they could arm
themselves, and fight them. They also dispersed them, and cast them
out of the city. As for such as could not run away, being women and
children, they slew of them above seven hundred. Afterward, when they
had carried every thing out of their houses, and had seized upon all
the fruits that were in a flourishing condition, they brought them into
Masada. And indeed these men laid all the villages that were about the
fortress waste, and made the whole country desolate; while there came to
them every day, from all parts, not a few men as corrupt as themselves.
At that time all the other regions of Judea that had hitherto been at
rest were in motion, by means of the robbers. Now as it is in a human
body, if the principal part be inflamed, all the members are subject to
the same distemper; so, by means of the sedition and disorder that
was in the metropolis,. had the wicked men that were in the country
opportunity to ravage the same. Accordingly, when every one of them had
plundered their own villages, they then retired into the desert; yet
were these men that now got together, and joined in the conspiracy by
parties, too small for an army, and too many for a gang of thieves: and
thus did they fall upon the holy places 11 and the cities; yet did it
now so happen that they were sometimes very ill treated by those upon
whom they fell with such violence, and were taken by them as men are
taken in war: but still they prevented any further punishment as do
robbers, who, as soon as their ravages [are discovered], run their
way. Nor was there now any part of Judea that was not in a miserable
condition, as well as its most eminent city also.

3. These things were told Vespasian by deserters; for although the
seditious watched all the passages out of the city, and destroyed all,
whosoever they were, that came thither, yet were there some that had
concealed themselves, and when they had fled to the Romans, persuaded
their general to come to their city's assistance, and save the remainder
of the people; informing him withal, that it was upon account of the
people's good-will to the Romans that many of them were already slain,
and the survivors in danger of the same treatment. Vespasian did indeed
already pity the calamities these men were in, and arose, in appearance,
as though he was going to besiege Jerusalem, but in reality to deliver
them from a [worse] siege they were already under. However, he was
obliged first to overthrow what remained elsewhere, and to leave nothing
out of Jerusalem behind him that might interrupt him in that siege.
Accordingly, he marched against Gadara, the metropolis of Perea, which
was a place of strength, and entered that city on the fourth day of the
month Dystrus [Adar]; for the men of power had sent an embassage to
him, without the knowledge of the seditious, to treat about a surrender;
which they did out of the desire they had of peace, and for saving their
effects, because many of the citizens of Gadara were rich men. This
embassy the opposite party knew nothing of, but discovered it as
Vespasian was approaching near the city. However, they despaired of
keeping possession of the city, as being inferior in number to their
enemies who were within the city, and seeing the Romans very near to
the city; so they resolved to fly, but thought it dishonorable to do it
without shedding some blood, and revenging themselves on the authors
of this surrender; so they seized upon Dolesus, [a person not only the
first in rank and family in that city, but one that seemed the occasion
of sending such an embassy,] and slew him, and treated his dead body
after a barbarous manner, so very violent was their anger at him, and
then ran out of the city. And as now the Roman army was just upon them,
the people of Gadara admitted Vespasian with joyful acclamations, and
received from him the security of his right hand, as also a garrison
of horsemen and footmen, to guard them against the excursions of the
runagates; for as to their wall, they had pulled it down before
the Romans desired them so to do, that they might thereby give them
assurance that they were lovers of peace, and that, if they had a mind,
they could not now make war against them.

4. And now Vespasian sent Placidus against those that had fled from
Gadara, with five hundred horsemen, and three thousand footmen, while he
returned himself to Cesarea, with the rest of the army. But as soon
as these fugitives saw the horsemen that pursued them just upon their
backs, and before they came to a close fight, they ran together to a
certain village, which was called Bethennabris, where finding a great
multitude of young men, and arming them, partly by their own consent,
partly by force, they rashly and suddenly assaulted Placidus and the
troops that were with him. These horsemen at the first onset gave way a
little, as contriving to entice them further off the wall; and when they
had drawn them into a place fit for their purpose, they made their horse
encompass them round, and threw their darts at them. So the horsemen cut
off the flight of the fugitives, while the foot terribly destroyed those
that fought against them; for those Jews did no more than show their
courage, and then were destroyed; for as they fell upon the Romans when
they were joined close together, and, as it were, walled about with
their entire armor, they were not able to find any place where the darts
could enter, nor were they any way able to break their ranks, while they
were themselves run through by the Roman darts, and, like the wildest
of wild beasts, rushed upon the point of others' swords; so some of them
were destroyed, as cut with their enemies' swords upon their faces, and
others were dispersed by the horsemen.

5. Now Placidus's concern was to exclude them in their flight from
getting into the village; and causing his horse to march continually on
that side of them, he then turned short upon them, and at the same time
his men made use of their darts, and easily took their aim at those that
were the nearest to them, as they made those that were further off turn
back by the terror they were in, till at last the most courageous of
them brake through those horsemen and fled to the wall of the village.
And now those that guarded the wall were in great doubt what to do;
for they could not bear the thoughts of excluding those that came from
Gadara, because of their own people that were among them; and yet, if
they should admit them, they expected to perish with them, which came
to pass accordingly; for as they were crowding together at the wall, the
Roman horsemen were just ready to fall in with them. However, the guards
prevented them, and shut the gates, when Placidus made an assault upon
them, and fighting courageously till it was dark, he got possession
of the wall, and of the people that were in the city, when the useless
multitude were destroyed; but those that were more potent ran away, and
the soldiers plundered the houses, and set the village on fire. As for
those that ran out of the village, they stirred up such as were in the
country, and exaggerating their own calamities, and telling them that
the whole army of the Romans were upon them, they put them into great
fear on every side; so they got in great numbers together, and fled to
Jericho, for they knew no other place that could afford them any hope of
escaping, it being a city that had a strong wall, and a great multitude
of inhabitants. But Placidus, relying much upon his horsemen, and his
former good success, followed them, and slew all that he overtook,
as far as Jordan; and when he had driven the whole multitude to the
river-side, where they were stopped by the current, [for it had been
augmented lately by rains, and was not fordable,] he put his soldiers
in array over against them; so the necessity the others were in provoked
them to hazard a battle, because there was no place whither they could
flee. They then extended themselves a very great way along the banks of
the river, and sustained the darts that were thrown at them, as well as
the attacks of the horsemen, who beat many of them, and pushed them into
the current. At which fight, hand to hand, fifteen thousand of them were
slain, while the number of those that were unwillingly forced to leap
into Jordan was prodigious. There were besides two thousand and two
hundred taken prisoners. A mighty prey was taken also, consisting of
asses, and sheep, and camels, and oxen.

6. Now this destruction that fell upon the Jews, as it was not inferior
to any of the rest in itself, so did it still appear greater than it
really was; and this, because not only the whole country through which
they fled was filled with slaughter, and Jordan could not be passed
over, by reason of the dead bodies that were in it, but because the lake
Asphaltites was also full of dead bodies, that were carried down into
it by the river. And now Placidus, after this good success that he had,
fell violently upon the neighboring smaller cities and villages; when he
took Abila, and Julias, and Bezemoth, and all those that lay as far as
the lake Asphaltites, and put such of the deserters into each of them as
he thought proper. He then put his soldiers on board the ships, and
slew such as had fled to the lake, insomuch that all Perea had
either surrendered themselves, or were taken by the Romans, as far as
Machaerus.






CHAPTER 8.


     How Vespasian Upon Hearing Of Some Commotions In Gall, <a
      href="#link4note-12" name="link4noteref-12" id="link4noteref-12">12</a>
     Made Haste To Finish The Jewish War. A Description Of
     Jericho, And Of The Great Plain; With An Account Besides Of
     The Lake Asphaltites.

1. In the mean time, an account came that there were commotions in Gall,
and that Vindex, together with the men of power in that country, had
revolted from Nero; which affair is more accurately described elsewhere.
This report, thus related to Vespasian, excited him to go on briskly
with the war; for he foresaw already the civil wars which were coming
upon them, nay, that the very government was in danger; and he thought,
if he could first reduce the eastern parts of the empire to peace, he
should make the fears for Italy the lighter; while therefore the winter
was his hinderance [from going into the field], he put garrisons into
the villages and smaller cities for their security; he put decurions
also into the villages, and centurions into the cities: he besides
this rebuilt many of the cities that had been laid waste; but at the
beginning of the spring he took the greatest part of his army, and led
it from Cesarea to Antipatris, where he spent two days in settling the
affairs of that city, and then, on the third day, he marched on, laying
waste and burning all the neighboring villages. And when he had laid
waste all the places about the toparchy of Thamnas, he passed on to
Lydda and Jamnia; and when both these cities had come over to him,
he placed a great many of those that had come over to him [from other
places] as inhabitants therein, and then came to Emmaus, where he seized
upon the passage which led thence to their metropolis, and fortified his
camp, and leaving the fifth legion therein, he came to the toparchy of
Bethletephon. He then destroyed that place, and the neighboring places,
by fire, and fortified, at proper places, the strong holds all about
Idumea; and when he had seized upon two villages, which were in the very
midst of Idumea, Betaris and Caphartobas, he slew above ten thousand of
the people, and carried into captivity above a thousand, and drove away
the rest of the multitude, and placed no small part of his own forces
in them, who overran and laid waste the whole mountainous country; while
he, with the rest of his forces, returned to Emmaus, whence he came down
through the country of Samaria, and hard by the city, by others called
Neapolis, [or Sichem,] but by the people of that country Mabortha, to
Corea, where he pitched his camp, on the second day of the month Desius
[Sivan]; and on the day following he came to Jericho; on which day
Trajan, one of his commanders, joined him with the forces he brought out
of Perea, all the places beyond Jordan being subdued already.

2. Hereupon a great multitude prevented their approach, and came out
of Jericho, and fled to those mountainous parts that lay over against
Jerusalem, while that part which was left behind was in a great measure
destroyed; they also found the city desolate. It is situated in a plain;
but a naked and barren mountain, of a very great length, hangs over it,
which extends itself to the land about Scythopolis northward, but as far
as the country of Sodom, and the utmost limits of the lake Asphaltites,
southward. This mountain is all of it very uneven and uninhabited, by
reason of its barrenness: there is an opposite mountain that is situated
over against it, on the other side of Jordan; this last begins at
Julias, and the northern quarters, and extends itself southward as far
as Somorrhon, 13 which is the bounds of Petra, in Arabia. In this ridge
of mountains there is one called the Iron Mountain, that runs in length
as far as Moab. Now the region that lies in the middle between these
ridges of mountains is called the Great Plain; it reaches from the
village Ginnabris, as far as the lake Asphaltites; its length is two
hundred and thirty furlongs, and its breadth a hundred and twenty, and
it is divided in the midst by Jordan. It hath two lakes in it, that of
Asphaltites, and that of Tiberias, whose natures are opposite to each
other; for the former is salt and unfruitful, but that of Tiberias is
sweet and fruitful. This plain is much burnt up in summer time, and, by
reason of the extraordinary heat, contains a very unwholesome air; it is
all destitute of water excepting the river Jordan, which water of Jordan
is the occasion why those plantations of palm trees that are near its
banks are more flourishing, and much more fruitful, as are those that
are remote from it not so flourishing, or fruitful.

3. Notwithstanding which, there is a fountain by Jericho, that runs
plentifully, and is very fit for watering the ground; it arises near
the old city, which Joshua, the son of Naue, the general of the Hebrews,
took the first of all the cities of the land of Canaan, by right of war.
The report is, that this fountain, at the beginning, caused not only the
blasting of the earth and the trees, but of the children born of women,
and that it was entirely of a sickly and corruptive nature to all
things whatsoever; but that it was made gentle, and very wholesome and
fruitful, by the prophet Elisha. This prophet was familiar with Elijah,
and was his successor, who, when he once was the guest of the people at
Jericho, and the men of the place had treated him very kindly, he both
made them amends as well as the country, by a lasting favor; for he went
out of the city to this fountain, and threw into the current an earthen
vessel full of salt; after which he stretched out his righteous hand
unto heaven, and, pouring out a mild drink-offering, he made this
supplication, That the current might be mollified, and that the veins of
fresh water might be opened; that God also would bring into the place
a more temperate and fertile air for the current, and would bestow upon
the people of that country plenty of the fruits of the earth, and a
succession of children; and that this prolific water might never fail
them, while they continued to be righteous. To these prayers Elisha
14 joined proper operations of his hands, after a skillful manner, and
changed the fountain; and that water, which had been the occasion of
barrenness and famine before, from that time did supply a numerous
posterity, and afforded great abundance to the country. Accordingly, the
power of it is so great in watering the ground, that if it do but once
touch a country, it affords a sweeter nourishment than other waters do,
when they lie so long upon them, till they are satiated with them. For
which reason, the advantage gained from other waters, when they flow in
great plenty, is but small, while that of this water is great when it
flows even in little quantities. Accordingly, it waters a larger space
of ground than any other waters do, and passes along a plain of seventy
furlongs long, and twenty broad; wherein it affords nourishment to those
most excellent gardens that are thick set with trees. There are in it
many sorts of palm trees that are watered by it, different from each
other in taste and name; the better sort of them, when they are pressed,
yield an excellent kind of honey, not much inferior in sweetness to
other honey. This country withal produces honey from bees; it also bears
that balsam which is the most precious of all the fruits in that place,
cypress trees also, and those that bear myrobalanum; so that he who
should pronounce this place to be divine would not be mistaken, wherein
is such plenty of trees produced as are very rare, and of the must
excellent sort. And indeed, if we speak of those other fruits, it will
not be easy to light on any climate in the habitable earth that can
well be compared to it, what is here sown comes up in such clusters;
the cause of which seems to me to be the warmth of the air, and the
fertility of the waters; the warmth calling forth the sprouts, and
making them spread, and the moisture making every one of them take root
firmly, and supplying that virtue which it stands in need of in summer
time. Now this country is then so sadly burnt up, that nobody cares to
come at it; and if the water be drawn up before sun-rising, and after
that exposed to the air, it becomes exceeding cold, and becomes of a
nature quite contrary to the ambient air; as in winter again it becomes
warm; and if you go into it, it appears very gentle. The ambient air is
here also of so good a temperature, that the people of the country are
clothed in linen-only, even when snow covers the rest of Judea. This
place is one hundred and fifty furlongs from Jerusalem, and sixty from
Jordan. The country, as far as Jerusalem, is desert and stony; but that
as far as Jordan and the lake Asphaltites lies lower indeed, though it
be equally desert and barren. But so much shall suffice to have said
about Jericho, and of the great happiness of its situation.

4. The nature of the lake Asphaltites is also worth describing. It is,
as I have said already, bitter and unfruitful. It is so light [or thick]
that it bears up the heaviest things that are thrown into it; nor is it
easy for any one to make things sink therein to the bottom, if he had a
mind so to do. Accordingly, when Vespasian went to see it, he commanded
that some who could not swim should have their hands tied behind them,
and be thrown into the deep, when it so happened that they all swam as
if a wind had forced them upwards. Moreover, the change of the color of
this lake is wonderful, for it changes its appearance thrice every
day; and as the rays of the sun fall differently upon it, the light is
variously reflected. However, it casts up black clods of bitumen in many
parts of it; these swim at the top of the water, and resemble both in
shape and bigness headless bulls; and when the laborers that belong to
the lake come to it, and catch hold of it as it hangs together, they
draw it into their ships; but when the ship is full, it is not easy to
cut off the rest, for it is so tenacious as to make the ship hang upon
its clods till they set it loose with the menstrual blood of women, and
with urine, to which alone it yields. This bitumen is not only
useful for the caulking of ships, but for the cure of men's bodies;
accordingly, it is mixed in a great many medicines. The length of this
lake is five hundred and eighty furlongs, where it is extended as far as
Zoar in Arabia; and its breadth is a hundred and fifty. The country of
Sodom borders upon it. It was of old a most happy land, both for the
fruits it bore and the riches of its cities, although it be now all
burnt up. It is related how, for the impiety of its inhabitants, it
was burnt by lightning; in consequence of which there are still the
remainders of that Divine fire, and the traces [or shadows] of the
five cities are still to be seen, as well as the ashes growing in their
fruits; which fruits have a color as if they were fit to be eaten, but
if you pluck them with your hands, they dissolve into smoke and ashes.
And thus what is related of this land of Sodom hath these marks of
credibility which our very sight affords us.






CHAPTER 9.


     That Vespasian, After He Had Taken Gadara Made Preparation
     For The Siege Of Jerusalem; But That, Upon His Hearing Of
     The Death Of Nero, He Changed His Intentions. As Also
     Concerning Simon Of Geras.

1. And now Vespasian had fortified all the places round about Jerusalem,
and erected citadels at Jericho and Adida, and placed garrisons in them
both, partly out of his own Romans, and partly out of the body of his
auxiliaries. He also sent Lucius Annius to Gerasa, and delivered to him
a body of horsemen, and a considerable number of footmen. So when he had
taken the city, which he did at the first onset, he slew a thousand of
those young men who had not prevented him by flying away; but he took
their families captive, and permitted his soldiers to plunder them of
their effects; after which he set fire to their houses, and went away to
the adjoining villages, while the men of power fled away, and the weaker
part were destroyed, and what was remaining was all burnt down. And now
the war having gone through all the mountainous country, and all the
plain country also, those that were at Jerusalem were deprived of
the liberty of going out of the city; for as to such as had a mind to
desert, they were watched by the zealots; and as to such as were not yet
on the side of the Romans, their army kept them in, by encompassing the
city round about on all sides.

2. Now as Vespasian was returned to Cesarea, and was getting ready with
all his army to march directly to Jerusalem, he was informed that Nero
was dead, after he had reigned thirteen years and eight days. But as to
any narration after what manner he abused his power in the government,
and committed the management of affairs to those vile wretches,
Nymphidius and Tigellinus, his unworthy freed-men; and how he had a plot
laid against him by them, and was deserted by all his guards, and ran
away with four of his most trusty freed-men, and slew himself in the
suburbs of Rome; and how those that occasioned his death were in no long
time brought themselves to punishment; how also the war in Gall ended;
and how Galba was made emperor 16 and returned out of Spain to Rome; and
how he was accused by the soldiers as a pusillanimous person, and slain
by treachery in the middle of the market-place at Rome, and Otho was
made emperor; with his expedition against the commanders of Vitellius,
and his destruction thereupon; and besides what troubles there were
under Vitellius, and the fight that was about the capitol; as also how
Antonius Primus and Mucianus slew Vitellius, and his German legions, and
thereby put an end to that civil war; I have omitted to give an exact
account of them, because they are well known by all, and they are
described by a great number of Greek and Roman authors; yet for the sake
of the connexion of matters, and that my history may not be incoherent,
I have just touched upon every thing briefly. Wherefore Vespasian put
off at first his expedition against Jerusalem, and stood waiting whither
the empire would be transferred after the death of Nero. Moreover, when
he heard that Galba was made emperor, he attempted nothing till he also
should send him some directions about the war: however, he sent his son
Titus to him, to salute him, and to receive his commands about the Jews.
Upon the very same errand did king Agrippa sail along with Titus to
Galba; but as they were sailing in their long ships by the coasts of
Achaia, for it was winter time, they heard that Galba was slain, before
they could get to him, after he had reigned seven months and as many
days. After whom Otho took the government, and undertook the management
of public affairs. So Agrippa resolved to go on to Rome without any
terror; on account of the change in the government; but Titus, by a
Divine impulse, sailed back from Greece to Syria, and came in great
haste to Cesarea, to his father. And now they were both in suspense
about the public affairs, the Roman empire being then in a fluctuating
condition, and did not go on with their expedition against the Jews, but
thought that to make any attack upon foreigners was now unseasonable, on
account of the solicitude they were in for their own country.

3. And now there arose another war at Jerusalem. There was a son of
Giora, one Simon, by birth of Gerasa, a young man, not so cunning
indeed as John [of Gisehala], who had already seized upon the city, but
superior in strength of body and courage; on which account, when he had
been driven away from that Acrabattene toparchy, which he once had, by
Ananus the high priest, he came to those robbers who had seized upon
Masada. At the first they suspected him, and only permitted him to come
with the women he brought with him into the lower part of the fortress,
while they dwelt in the upper part of it themselves. However, his manner
so well agreed with theirs, and he seemed so trusty a man, that he went
out with them, and ravaged and destroyed the country with them about
Masada; yet when he persuaded them to undertake greater things, he could
not prevail with them so to do; for as they were accustomed to dwell in
that citadel, they were afraid of going far from that which was
their hiding-place; but he affecting to tyrannize, and being fond of
greatness, when he had heard of the death of Ananus, he left them, and
went into the mountainous part of the country. So he proclaimed liberty
to those in slavery, and a reward to those already free, and got
together a set of wicked men from all quarters.

4. And as he had now a strong body of men about him, he overran the
villages that lay in the mountainous country, and when there were still
more and more that came to him, he ventured to go down into the lower
parts of the country, and since he was now become formidable to the
cities, many of the men of power were corrupted by him; so that his army
was no longer composed of slaves and robbers, but a great many of the
populace were obedient to him as to their king. He then overran the
Acrabattene toparchy, and the places that reached as far as the Great
Idumea; for he built a wall at a certain village called Nain, and made
use of that as a fortress for his own party's security; and at the
valley called Paran, he enlarged many of the caves, and many others he
found ready for his purpose; these he made use of as repositories for
his treasures, and receptacles for his prey, and therein he laid up the
fruits that he had got by rapine; and many of his partizans had their
dwelling in them; and he made no secret of it that he was exercising his
men beforehand, and making preparations for the assault of Jerusalem.

5. Whereupon the zealots, out of the dread they were in of his attacking
them, and being willing to prevent one that was growing up to oppose
them, went out against him with their weapons. Simon met them, and
joining battle with them, slew a considerable number of them, and drove
the rest before him into the city, but durst not trust so much upon his
forces as to make an assault upon the walls; but he resolved first to
subdue Idumea, and as he had now twenty thousand armed men, he marched
to the borders of their country. Hereupon the rulers of the Idumeans
got together on the sudden the most warlike part of their people, about
twenty-five thousand in number, and permitted the rest to be a guard
to their own country, by reason of the incursions that were made by the
Sicarii that were at Masada. Thus they received Simon at their borders,
where they fought him, and continued the battle all that day; and the
dispute lay whether they had conquered him, or been conquered by him. So
he went back to Nain, as did the Idumeans return home. Nor was it long
ere Simon came violently again upon their country; when he pitched his
camp at a certain village called Thecoe, and sent Eleazar, one of his
companions, to those that kept garrison at Herodium, and in order to
persuade them to surrender that fortress to him. The garrison received
this man readily, while they knew nothing of what he came about; but as
soon as he talked of the surrender of the place, they fell upon him with
their drawn swords, till he found that he had no place for flight, when
he threw himself down from the wall into the valley beneath; so he died
immediately: but the Idumeans, who were already much afraid of Simon's
power, thought fit to take a view of the enemy's army before they
hazarded a battle with them.

6. Now there was one of their commanders named Jacob, who offered to
serve them readily upon that occasion, but had it in his mind to betray
them. He went therefore from the village Alurus, wherein the army of the
Idumeans were gotten together, and came to Simon, and at the very first
he agreed to betray his country to him, and took assurances upon oath
from him that he should always have him in esteem, and then promised him
that he would assist him in subduing all Idumea under him; upon which
account he was feasted after an obliging manner by Simon, and elevated
by his mighty promises; and when he was returned to his own men, he at
first belied the army of Simon, and said it was manifold more in number
than what it was; after which, he dexterously persuaded the commanders,
and by degrees the whole multitude, to receive Simon, and to surrender
the whole government up to him without fighting. And as he was doing
this, he invited Simon by his messengers, and promised him to disperse
the Idumeans, which he performed also; for as soon as their army was
nigh them, he first of all got upon his horse, and fled, together with
those whom he had corrupted; hereupon a terror fell upon the whole
multitude; and before it came to a close fight, they broke their ranks,
and every one retired to his own home.

7. Thus did Simon unexpectedly march into Idumea, without bloodshed, and
made a sudden attack upon the city Hebron, and took it; wherein he got
possession of a great deal of prey, and plundered it of a vast quantity
of fruit. Now the people of the country say that it is an ancienter
city, not only than any in that country, but than Memphis in Egypt, and
accordingly its age is reckoned at two thousand and three hundred
years. They also relate that it had been the habitation of Abram, the
progenitor of the Jews, after he had removed out of Mesopotamia; and
they say that his posterity descended from thence into Egypt, whose
monuments are to this very time showed in that small city; the fabric of
which monuments are of the most excellent marble, and wrought after the
most elegant manner. There is also there showed, at the distance of six
furlongs from the city, a very large turpentine tree 17 and the report
goes, that this tree has continued ever since the creation of the world.
Thence did Simon make his progress over all Idumea, and did not only
ravage the cities and villages, but lay waste the whole country; for,
besides those that were completely armed, he had forty thousand men that
followed him, insomuch that he had not provisions enough to suffice such
a multitude. Now, besides this want of provisions that he was in, he
was of a barbarous disposition, and bore great anger at this nation, by
which means it came to pass that Idumea was greatly depopulated; and as
one may see all the woods behind despoiled of their leaves by locusts,
after they have been there, so was there nothing left behind Simon's
army but a desert. Some places they burnt down, some they utterly
demolished, and whatsoever grew in the country, they either trod it
down or fed upon it, and by their marches they made the ground that was
cultivated harder and more untractable than that which was barren. In
short, there was no sign remaining of those places that had been laid
waste, that ever they had had a being.

8. This success of Simon excited the zealots afresh; and though they
were afraid to fight him openly in a fair battle, yet did they lay
ambushes in the passes, and seized upon his wife, with a considerable
number of her attendants; whereupon they came back to the city
rejoicing, as if they had taken Simon himself captive, and were
in present expectation that he would lay down his arms, and make
supplication to them for his wife; but instead of indulging any merciful
affection, he grew very angry at them for seizing his beloved wife; so
he came to the wall of Jerusalem, and, like wild beasts when they are
wounded, and cannot overtake those that wounded them, he vented his
spleen upon all persons that he met with. Accordingly, he caught all
those that were come out of the city gates, either to gather herbs
or sticks, who were unarmed and in years; he then tormented them and
destroyed them, out of the immense rage he was in, and was almost ready
to taste the very flesh of their dead bodies. He also cut off the hands
of a great many, and sent them into the city to astonish his enemies,
and in order to make the people fall into a sedition, and desert those
that had been the authors of his wife's seizure. He also enjoined them
to tell the people that Simon swore by the God of the universe, who sees
all things, that unless they will restore him his wife, he will break
down their wall, and inflict the like punishment upon all the citizens,
without sparing any age, and without making any distinction between the
guilty and the innocent. These threatenings so greatly affrighted, not
the people only, but the zealots themselves also, that they sent his
wife back to him; when he became a little milder, and left off his
perpetual blood-shedding.

9. But now sedition and civil war prevailed, not only over Judea, but
in Italy also; for now Galba was slain in the midst of the Roman
market-place; then was Otho made emperor, and fought against Vitellius,
who set up for emperor also; for the legions in Germany had chosen him.
But when he gave battle to Valens and Cecinna, who were Vitellius's
generals, at Betriacum, in Gaul, Otho gained the advantage on the first
day, but on the second day Vitellius's soldiers had the victory; and
after much slaughter Otho slew himself, when he had heard of this defeat
at Brixia, and after he had managed the public affairs three months and
two days. 18 Otho's army also came over to Vitellius's generals, and he
came himself down to Rome with his army. But in the mean time Vespasian
removed from Cesarea, on the fifth day of the month Desius, [Sivan,] and
marched against those places of Judea which were not yet overthrown.
So he went up to the mountainous country, and took those two toparchies
that were called the Gophnitick and Acrabattene toparchies. After
which he took Bethel and Ephraim, two small cities; and when he had put
garrisons into them, he rode as far as Jerusalem, in which march he took
many prisoners, and many captives; but Cerealis, one of his commanders,
took a body of horsemen and footmen, and laid waste that part of
Idumea which was called the Upper Idumea, and attacked Caphethra, which
pretended to be a small city, and took it at the first onset, and burnt
it down. He also attacked Caphatabira, and laid siege to it, for it had
a very strong wall; and when he expected to spend a long time in that
siege, those that were within opened their gates on the sudden, and came
to beg pardon, and surrendered themselves up to him. When Cerealis had
conquered them, he went to Hebron, another very ancient city. I have
told you already that this city is situated in a mountainous country not
far off Jerusalem; and when he had broken into the city by force, what
multitude and young men were left therein he slew, and burnt down the
city; so that as now all the places were taken, excepting Herodlum, and
Masada, and Machaerus, which were in the possession of the robbers, so
Jerusalem was what the Romans at present aimed at.

10. And now, as soon as Simon had set his wife free, and recovered her
from the zealots, he returned back to the remainders of Idumea, and
driving the nation all before him from all quarters, he compelled a
great number of them to retire to Jerusalem; he followed them himself
also to the city, and encompassed the wall all round again; and when he
lighted upon any laborers that were coming thither out of the country,
he slew them. Now this Simon, who was without the wall, was a greater
terror to the people than the Romans themselves, as were the zealots who
were within it more heavy upon them than both of the other; and during
this time did the mischievous contrivances and courage [of John] corrupt
the body of the Galileans; for these Galileans had advanced this John,
and made him very potent, who made them suitable requital from the
authority he had obtained by their means; for he permitted them to do
all things that any of them desired to do, while their inclination to
plunder was insatiable, as was their zeal in searching the houses of the
rich; and for the murdering of the men, and abusing of the women, it was
sport to them. They also devoured what spoils they had taken, together
with their blood, and indulged themselves in feminine wantonness,
without any disturbance, till they were satiated therewith; while they
decked their hair, and put on women's garments, and were besmeared over
with ointments; and that they might appear very comely, they had paints
under their eyes, and imitated not only the ornaments, but also the
lusts of women, and were guilty of such intolerable uncleanness, that
they invented unlawful pleasures of that sort. And thus did they roll
themselves up and down the city, as in a brothel-house, and defiled it
entirely with their impure actions; nay, while their faces looked like
the faces of women, they killed with their right hands; and when their
gait was effeminate, they presently attacked men, and became warriors,
and drew their swords from under their finely dyed cloaks, and ran every
body through whom they alighted upon. However, Simon waited for such as
ran away from John, and was the more bloody of the two; and he who had
escaped the tyrant within the wall was destroyed by the other that lay
before the gates, so that all attempts of flying and deserting to the
Romans were cut off, as to those that had a mind so to do.

11. Yet did the army that was under John raise a sedition against him,
and all the Idumeans separated themselves from the tyrant, and attempted
to destroy him, and this out of their envy at his power, and hatred of
his cruelty; so they got together, and slew many of the zealots, and
drove the rest before them into that royal palace that was built by
Grapte, who was a relation of Izates, the king of Adiabene; the Idumeans
fell in with them, and drove the zealots out thence into the temple, and
betook themselves to plunder John's effects; for both he himself was in
that palace, and therein had he laid up the spoils he had acquired by
his tyranny. In the mean time, the multitude of those zealots that were
dispersed over the city ran together to the temple unto those that fled
thither, and John prepared to bring them down against the people and the
Idumeans, who were not so much afraid of being attacked by them [because
they were themselves better soldiers than they] as at their madness,
lest they should privately sally out of the temple and get among them,
and not only destroy them, but set the city on fire also. So they
assembled themselves together, and the high priests with them, and took
counsel after what manner they should avoid their assault. Now it was
God who turned their opinions to the worst advice, and thence they
devised such a remedy to get themselves free as was worse than the
disease itself. Accordingly, in order to overthrow John, they determined
to admit Simon, and earnestly to desire the introduction of a second
tyrant into the city; which resolution they brought to perfection, and
sent Matthias, the high priest, to beseech this Simon to come in to
them, of whom they had so often been afraid. Those also that had fled
from the zealots in Jerusalem joined in this request to him, out of
the desire they had of preserving their houses and their effects.
Accordingly he, in an arrogant manner, granted them his lordly
protection, and came into the city, in order to deliver it from the
zealots. The people also made joyful acclamations to him, as their
savior and their preserver; but when he was come in, with his army, he
took care to secure his own authority, and looked upon those that had
invited him in to be no less his enemies than those against whom the
invitation was intended.

12. And thus did Simon get possession of Jerusalem, in the third year
of the war, in the month Xanthicus [Nisan]; whereupon John, with his
multitude of zealots, as being both prohibited from coming out of the
temple, and having lost their power in the city, [for Simon and
his party had plundered them of what they had,] were in despair of
deliverance. Simon also made an assault upon the temple, with the
assistance of the people, while the others stood upon the cloisters and
the battlements, and defended themselves from their assaults. However,
a considerable number of Simon's party fell, and many were carried off
wounded; for the zealots threw their darts easily from a superior place,
and seldom failed of hitting their enemies; but having the advantage of
situation, and having withal erected four very large towers aforehand,
that their darts might come from higher places, one at the north-east
corner of the court, one above the Xystus, the third at another corner
over against the lower city, and the last was erected above the top of
the Pastophoria, where one of the priests stood of course, and gave a
signal beforehand, with a trumpet 19 at the beginning of every seventh
day, in the evening twilight, as also at the evening when that day was
finished, as giving notice to the people when they were to leave off
work, and when they were to go to work again. These men also set their
engines to cast darts and stones withal, upon those towers, with their
archers and slingers. And now Simon made his assault upon the temple
more faintly, by reason that the greatest part of his men grew weary of
that work; yet did he not leave off his opposition, because his army
was superior to the others, although the darts which were thrown by the
engines were carried a great way, and slew many of those that fought for
him.






CHAPTER 10.


     How The Soldiers, Both In Judea And Egypt, Proclaimed
     Vespasian Emperor; And How Vespasian Released Josephus From
     His Bonds.

1. Now about this very time it was that heavy calamities came about Rome
on all sides; for Vitellius was come from Germany with his soldiery, and
drew along with him a great multitude of other men besides. And when the
spaces allotted for soldiers could not contain them, he made all Rome
itself his camp, and filled all the houses with his armed men; which
men, when they saw the riches of Rome with those eyes which had never
seen such riches before, and found themselves shone round about on all
sides with silver and gold, they had much ado to contain their covetous
desires, and were ready to betake themselves to plunder, and to the
slaughter of such as should stand in their way. And this was the state
of affairs in Italy at that time.

2. But when Vespasian had overthrown all the places that were near to
Jerusalem, he returned to Cesarea, and heard of the troubles that were
at Rome, and that Vitellius was emperor. This produced indignation in
him, although he well knew how to be governed as well as to govern,
and could not, with any satisfaction, own him for his lord who acted so
madly, and seized upon the government as if it were absolutely destitute
of a governor. And as this sorrow of his was violent, he was not able to
support the torments he was under, nor to apply himself further in other
wars, when his native country was laid waste; but then, as much as his
passion excited him to avenge his country, so much was he restrained
by the consideration of his distance therefrom; because fortune might
prevent him, and do a world of mischief before he could himself sail
over the sea to Italy, especially as it was still the winter season; so
he restrained his anger, how vehement soever it was at this time.

3. But now his commanders and soldiers met in several companies, and
consulted openly about changing the public affairs; and, out of their
indignation, cried out, how "at Rome there are soldiers that live
delicately, and when they have not ventured so much as to hear the fame
of war, they ordain whom they please for our governors, and in hopes
of gain make them emperors; while you, who have gone through so many
labors, and are grown into years under your helmets, give leave to
others to use such a power, when yet you have among yourselves one
more worthy to rule than any whom they have set up. Now what juster
opportunity shall they ever have of requiting their generals, if they
do not make use of this that is now before them? while there is so much
juster reasons for Vespasian's being emperor than for Vitellius; as they
are themselves more deserving than those that made the other emperors;
for that they have undergone as great wars as have the troops that come
from Germany; nor are they inferior in war to those that have brought
that tyrant to Rome, nor have they undergone smaller labors than
they; for that neither will the Roman senate, nor people, bear such a
lascivious emperor as Vitellius, if he be compared with their chaste
Vespasian; nor will they endure a most barbarous tyrant, instead of
a good governor, nor choose one that hath no child 20 to preside over
them, instead of him that is a father; because the advancement of men's
own children to dignities is certainly the greatest security kings can
have for themselves. Whether, therefore, we estimate the capacity
of governing from the skill of a person in years, we ought to have
Vespasian, or whether from the strength of a young man, we ought to have
Titus; for by this means we shall have the advantage of both their ages,
for that they will afford strength to those that shall be made emperors,
they having already three legions, besides other auxiliaries from the
neighboring kings, and will have further all the armies in the east to
support them, as also those in Europe, so they as they are out of the
distance and dread of Vitellius, besides such auxiliaries as they may
have in Italy itself; that is, Vespasian's brother, 21 and his other son
[Domitian]; the one of whom will bring in a great many of those
young men that are of dignity, while the other is intrusted with the
government of the city, which office of his will be no small means of
Vespasian's obtaining the government. Upon the whole, the case may be
such, that if we ourselves make further delays, the senate may choose an
emperor, whom the soldiers, who are the saviors of the empire, will have
in contempt."

4. These were the discourses the soldiers had in their several
companies; after which they got together in a great body, and,
encouraging one another, they declared Vespasian emperor, 22 and
exhorted him to save the government, which was now in danger. Now
Vespasian's concern had been for a considerable time about the public,
yet did he not intend to set up for governor himself, though his actions
showed him to deserve it, while he preferred that safety which is in a
private life before the dangers in a state of such dignity; but when he
refused the empire, the commanders insisted the more earnestly upon his
acceptance; and the soldiers came about him, with their drawn swords
in their hands, and threatened to kill him, unless he would now live
according to his dignity. And when he had shown his reluctance a great
while, and had endeavored to thrust away this dominion from him, he at
length, being not able to persuade them, yielded to their solicitations
that would salute him emperor.

5. So upon the exhortations of Mucianus, and the other commanders, that
he would accept of the empire, and upon that of the rest of the army,
who cried out that they were willing to be led against all his opposers,
he was in the first place intent upon gaining the dominion over
Alexandria, as knowing that Egypt was of the greatest consequence, in
order to obtain the entire government, because of its supplying of corn
[to Rome]; which corn, if he could be master of, he hoped to dethrone
Vitellius, supposing he should aim to keep the empire by force [for he
would not be able to support himself, if the multitude at Rome should
once be in want of food]; and because he was desirous to join the two
legions that were at Alexandria to the other legions that were with him.
He also considered with himself, that he should then have that country
for a defense to himself against the uncertainty of fortune; for Egypt
23 is hard to be entered by land, and hath no good havens by sea. It
hath on the west the dry deserts of Libya; and on the south Siene, that
divides it from Ethiopia, as well as the cataracts of the Nile, that
cannot be sailed over; and on the east the Red Sea extended as far as
Coptus; and it is fortified on the north by the land that reaches to
Syria, together with that called the Egyptian Sea, having no havens in
it for ships. And thus is Egypt walled about on every side. Its length
between Pelusium and Siene is two thousand furlongs, and the passage by
sea from Plinthine to Pelusium is three thousand six hundred furlongs.
Its river Nile is navigable as far as the city called Elephantine, the
forenamed cataracts hindering ships from going any farther, The haven
also of Alexandria is not entered by the mariners without difficulty,
even in times of peace; for the passage inward is narrow, and full of
rocks that lie under the water, which oblige the mariners to turn from
a straight direction: its left side is blocked up by works made by men's
hands on both sides; on its right side lies the island called Pharus,
which is situated just before the entrance, and supports a very great
tower, that affords the sight of a fire to such as sail within three
hundred furlongs of it, that ships may cast anchor a great way off in
the night time, by reason of the difficulty of sailing nearer. About
this island are built very great piers, the handiwork of men, against
which, when the sea dashes itself, and its waves are broken against
those boundaries, the navigation becomes very troublesome, and the
entrance through so narrow a passage is rendered dangerous; yet is the
haven itself, when you are got into it, a very safe one, and of thirty
furlongs in largeness; into which is brought what the country wants in
order to its happiness, as also what abundance the country affords more
than it wants itself is hence distributed into all the habitable earth.

6. Justly, therefore, did Vespasian desire to obtain that government,
in order to corroborate his attempts upon the whole empire; so he
immediately sent to Tiberius Alexander, who was then governor of Egypt
and of Alexandria, and informed him what the army had put upon him,
and how he, being forced to accept of the burden of the government, was
desirous to have him for his confederate and supporter. Now as soon as
ever Alexander had read this letter, he readily obliged the legions
and the multitude to take the oath of fidelity to Vespasian, both which
willingly complied with him, as already acquainted with the courage
of the man, from that his conduct in their neighborhood. Accordingly
Vespasian, looking upon himself as already intrusted with the
government, got all things ready for his journey [to Rome]. Now fame
carried this news abroad more suddenly than one could have thought, that
he was emperor over the east, upon which every city kept festivals, and
celebrated sacrifices and oblations for such good news; the legions
also that were in Mysia and Pannonia, who had been in commotion a little
before, on account of this insolent attempt of Vitellius, were very
glad to take the oath of fidelity to Vespasian, upon his coming to
the empire. Vespasian then removed from Cesarea to Berytus, where
many embassages came to him from Syria, and many from other provinces,
bringing with them from every city crowns, and the congratulations of
the people. Mucianus came also, who was the president of the province,
and told him with what alacrity the people [received the news of his
advancement], and how the people of every city had taken the oath of
fidelity to him.

7. So Vespasian's good fortune succeeded to his wishes every where, and
the public affairs were, for the greatest part, already in his hands;
upon which he considered that he had not arrived at the government
without Divine Providence, but that a righteous kind of fate had brought
the empire under his power; for as he called to mind the other signals,
which had been a great many every where, that foretold he should obtain
the government, so did he remember what Josephus had said to him when he
ventured to foretell his coming to the empire while Nero was alive; so
he was much concerned that this man was still in bonds with him. He then
called for Mucianus, together with his other commanders and friends,
and, in the first place, he informed them what a valiant man Josephus
had been, and what great hardships he had made him undergo in the siege
of Jotapata. After that he related those predictions of his 24 which he
had then suspected as fictions, suggested out of the fear he was in,
but which had by time been demonstrated to be Divine. "It is a shameful
thing [said he] that this man, who hath foretold my coming to the empire
beforehand, and been the minister of a Divine message to me, should
still be retained in the condition of a captive or prisoner." So he
called for Josephus, and commanded that he should be set at liberty;
whereupon the commanders promised themselves glorious things, from this
requital Vespasian made to a stranger. Titus was then present with
his father, and said, "O father, it is but just that the scandal [of a
prisoner] should be taken off Josephus, together with his iron chain.
For if we do not barely loose his bonds, but cut them to pieces, he will
be like a man that had never been bound at all." For that is the usual
method as to such as have been bound without a cause. This advice was
agreed to by Vespasian also; so there came a man in, and cut the chain
to pieces; while Josephus received this testimony of his integrity for
a reward, and was moreover esteemed a person of credit as to futurities
also.






CHAPTER 11.


     That Upon The Conquest And Slaughter Of Vitellius Vespasian
     Hastened His Journey To Rome; But Titus His Son Returned To
     Jerusalem.

1. And now, when Vespasian had given answers to the embassages, and had
disposed of the places of power justly, 25 and according to every one's
deserts, he came to Antioch, and consulting which way he had best take,
he preferred to go for Rome, rather than to march to Alexandria, because
he saw that Alexandria was sure to him already, but that the affairs at
Rome were put into disorder by Vitellius; so he sent Mucianus to Italy,
and committed a considerable army both of horsemen and footmen to him;
yet was Mucianus afraid of going by sea, because it was the middle of
winter, and so he led his army on foot through Cappadocia and Phrygia.

2. In the mean time, Antonius Primus took the third of the legions that
were in Mysia, for he was president of that province, and made haste, in
order to fight Vitellius; whereupon Vitellius sent away Cecinna, with
a great army, having a mighty confidence in him, because of his having
beaten Otho. This Cecinna marched out of Rome in great haste, and found
Antonius about Cremona in Gall, which city is in the borders of Italy;
but when he saw there that the enemy were numerous and in good order, he
durst not fight them; and as he thought a retreat dangerous, so he began
to think of betraying his army to Antonius. Accordingly, he assembled
the centurions and tribunes that were under his command, and persuaded
them to go over to Antonius, and this by diminishing the reputation of
Vitellius, and by exaggerating the power of Vespasian. He also told them
that with the one there was no more than the bare name of dominion, but
with the other was the power of it; and that it was better for them to
prevent necessity, and gain favor, and, while they were likely to be
overcome in battle, to avoid the danger beforehand, and go over to
Antonius willingly; that Vespasian was able of himself to subdue what
had not yet submitted without their assistance, while Vitellius could
not preserve what he had already with it.

3. Cecinna said this, and much more to the same purpose, and persuaded
them to comply with him; and both he and his army deserted; but still
the very same night the soldiers repented of what they had done, and a
fear seized on them, lest perhaps Vitellius who sent them should get the
better; and drawing their swords, they assaulted Cecinna, in order to
kill him; and the thing had been done by them, if the tribunes had not
fallen upon their knees, and besought them not to do it; so the soldiers
did not kill him, but put him in bonds, as a traitor, and were about to
send him to Vitellius. When [Antonius] Primus heard of this, he raised
up his men immediately, and made them put on their armor, and led them
against those that had revolted; hereupon they put themselves in order
of battle, and made a resistance for a while, but were soon beaten, and
fled to Cremona; then did Primus take his horsemen, and cut off their
entrance into the city, and encompassed and destroyed a great multitude
of them before the city, and fell into the city together with the rest,
and gave leave to his soldiers to plunder it. And here it was that many
strangers, who were merchants, as well as many of the people of that
country, perished, and among them Vitellius's whole army, being thirty
thousand and two hundred, while Antonius lost no more of those that came
with him from Mysia than four thousand and five hundred: he then loosed
Cecinna, and sent him to Vespasian to tell him the good news. So he
came, and was received by him, and covered the scandal of his treachery
by the unexpected honors he received from Vespasian.

4. And now, upon the news that Antonius was approaching, Sabinus took
courage at Rome, and assembled those cohorts of soldiers that kept watch
by night, and in the night time seized upon the capitol; and, as the
day came on, many men of character came over to him, with Domitian,
his brother's son, whose encouragement was of very great weight for the
compassing the government. Now Vitellius was not much concerned at this
Primus, but was very angry with those that had revolted with Sabinus;
and thirsting, out of his own natural barbarity, after noble blood,
he sent out that part of the army which came along with him to fight
against the capitol; and many bold actions were done on this side, and
on the side of those that held the temple. But at last, the soldiers
that came from Germany, being too numerous for the others, got the hill
into their possession, where Domitian, with many other of the principal
Romans, providentially escaped, while the rest of the multitude were
entirely cut to pieces, and Sabinus himself was brought to Vitellius,
and then slain; the soldiers also plundered the temple of its ornaments,
and set it on fire. But now within a day's time came Antonius, with his
army, and were met by Vitellius and his army; and having had a battle
in three several places, the last were all destroyed. Then did Vitellius
come out of the palace, in his cups, and satiated with an extravagant
and luxurious meal, as in the last extremity, and being drawn along
through the multitude, and abused with all sorts of torments, had his
head cut off in the midst of Rome, having retained the government eight
months and five days 26 and had he lived much longer, I cannot but think
the empire would not have been sufficient for his lust. Of the others
that were slain, were numbered above fifty thousand. This battle was
fought on the third day of the month Apelleus [Casleu]; on the next day
Mucianus came into the city with his army, and ordered Antonius and his
men to leave off killing; for they were still searching the houses,
and killed many of Vitellius's soldiers, and many of the populace, as
supposing them to be of his party, preventing by their rage any accurate
distinction between them and others. He then produced Domitian, and
recommended him to the multitude, until his father should come himself;
so the people being now freed from their fears, made acclamations of
joy for Vespasian, as for their emperor, and kept festival days for his
confirmation, and for the destruction of Vitellius.

5. And now, as Vespasian was come to Alexandria, this good news
came from Rome, and at the same time came embassies from all his own
habitable earth, to congratulate him upon his advancement; and though
this Alexandria was the greatest of all cities next to Rome, it proved
too narrow to contain the multitude that then came to it. So upon this
confirmation of Vespasian's entire government, which was now settled,
and upon the unexpected deliverance of the public affairs of the Romans
from ruin, Vespasian turned his thoughts to what remained unsubdued in
Judea. However, he himself made haste to go to Rome, as the winter was
now almost over, and soon set the affairs of Alexandria in order,
but sent his son Titus, with a select part of his army, to destroy
Jerusalem. So Titus marched on foot as far as Nicopolis, which is
distant twenty furlongs from Alexandria; there he put his army on board
some long ships, and sailed upon the river along the Mendesian Nomus,
as far as the city Tumuis; there he got out of the ships, and walked
on foot, and lodged all night at a small city called Tanis. His second
station was Heracleopolis, and his third Pelusium; he then refreshed his
army at that place for two days, and on the third passed over the mouths
of the Nile at Pelusium; he then proceeded one station over the desert,
and pitched his camp at the temple of the Casian Jupiter, 27 and on the
next day at Ostracine. This station had no water, but the people of
the country make use of water brought from other places. After this he
rested at Rhinocolura, and from thence he went to Raphia, which was
his fourth station. This city is the beginning of Syria. For his fifth
station he pitched his camp at Gaza; after which he came to Ascalon, and
thence to Jamnia, and after that to Joppa, and from Joppa to Cesarea,
having taken a resolution to gather all his other forces together at
that place.

WAR BOOK 4 FOOTNOTES

1 (return) [ Here we have the exact situation of Jeroboam's "at the exit
of Little Jordan into Great Jordan, near the place called Daphne," but
of old Dan. See the note in Antiq. B. VIII. ch. 8. sect. 4. But Reland
suspects flint here we should read Dan instead of there being no where
else mention of a place called Daphne.]


2 (return) [ These numbers in Josephus of thirty furlongs' ascent to the
top of Mount Tabor, whether we estimate it by winding and gradual, or
by the perpendicular altitude, and of twenty-six furlongs' circumference
upon the top, as also fifteen furlongs for this ascent in Polybius, with
Geminus's perpendicular altitude of almost fourteen furlongs, here noted
by Dr. Hudson, do none of' them agree with the authentic testimony of
Mr. Maundrell, an eye-witness, p. 112, who says he was not an hour in
getting up to the top of this Mount Tabor, and that the area of the top
is an oval of about two furlongs in length, and one in breadth. So I
rather suppose Josephus wrote three furlongs for the ascent or altitude,
instead of thirty; and six furlongs for the circumference at the
top, instead of twenty-six,--since a mountain of only three furlongs
perpendicular altitude may easily require near an hour's ascent, and the
circumference of an oval of the foregoing quantity is near six furlongs.
Nor certainly could such a vast circumference as twenty-six furlongs,
or three miles and a quarter, at that height be encompassed with a
wall, including a trench and other fortifications, [perhaps those still
remaining, ibid.] in the small interval of forty days, as Josephus here
says they were by himself.]


3 (return) [ This name Dorcas in Greek, was Tabitha in Hebrew or Syriac,
as Acts 9:36. Accordingly, some of the manuscripts set it down here
Tabetha or Tabeta. Nor can the context in Josephus be made out by
supposing the reading to have been this: "The son of Tabitha; which, in
the language of our country, denotes Dorcas" [or a doe].]


4 (return) [ Here we may discover the utter disgrace and ruin of the
high priesthood among the Jews, when undeserving, ignoble, and vile
persons were advanced to that holy office by the seditious; which sort
of high priests, as Josephus well remarks here, were thereupon obliged
to comply with and assist those that advanced them in their impious
practices. The names of these high priests, or rather ridiculous
and profane persons, were Jesus the son of Damneus, Jesus the son of
Gamaliel, Matthias the son of Theophilus, and that prodigious ignoramus
Phannias, the son of Samuel; all whom we shall meet with in Josephus's
future history of this war; nor do we meet with any other so much as
pretended high priest after Phannias, till Jerusalem was taken and
destroyed.]


5 (return) [ This tribe or course of the high priests, or priests, here
called Eniachim, seems to the learned Mr. Lowth, one well versed in
Josephus, to be that 1 Chronicles 24:12, "the course of Jakim," where
some copies have "the course of Eliakim;" and I think this to be by no
means an improbable conjecture.]


6 (return) [ This Symeon, the son of Gamaliel, is mentioned as the
president of the Jewish sanhedrim, and one that perished in the
destruction of Jerusalem, by the Jewish Rabbins, as Reland observes on
this place. He also tells us that those Rabbins mention one Jesus
the son of Gamala, as once a high priest, but this long before the
destruction of Jerusalem; so that if he were the same person with this
Jesus the son of Gamala, Josephus, he must have lived to be very old, or
they have been very bad chronologers.]


7 (return) [ It is worth noting here, that this Ananus, the best of the
Jews at this time, and the high priest, who was so very uneasy at the
profanation of the Jewish courts of the temple by the zealots, did not
however scruple the profanation of the "court of the Gentiles;" as in
our Savior's days it was very much profaned by the Jews; and made a
market-place, nay, a "den of thieves," without scruple, Matthew 21:12,
13; Mark 11:15-17. Accordingly Josephus himself, when he speaks of the
two inner courts, calls them both hagia or holy places; but, so far as
I remember, never gives that character of the court of the Gentiles. See
B. V. ch. 9. sect. 2.]


8 (return) [ This appellation of Jerusalem given it here by Simon, the
general of the Idumeans, "the common city" of the Idumeans, who were
proselytes of justice, as well as of the original native Jews, greatly
confirms that maxim of the Rabbins, here set down by Reland, that
"Jerusalem was not assigned, or appropriated, to the tribe of Benjamin
or Judah, but every tribe had equal right to it [at their coming to
worship there at the several festivals]." See a little before, ch. 3.
sect. 3, or "worldly worship," as the author to the Hebrews calls the
sanctuary, "a worldly sanctuary."]


9 (return) [ Some commentators are ready to suppose that this
"Zacharias, the son of Baruch," here most unjustly slain by the Jews
in the temple, was the very same person with "Zacharias, the son of
Barachias," whom our Savior says the Jews "slew between the temple and
the altar," Matthew 23:35. This is a somewhat strange exposition; since
Zechariah the prophet was really "the son of Barachiah," and "grandson
of Iddo, Zechariah 1:1; and how he died, we have no other account than
that before us in St. Matthew: while this "Zacharias" was "the son of
Baruch." Since the slaughter was past when our Savior spake these
words, the Jews had then already slain him; whereas this slaughter of
"Zacharias, the son of Baruch," in Josephus, was then about thirty-four
years future. And since the slaughter was "between the temple and the
altar," in the court of the priests, one of the most sacred and remote
parts of the whole temple; while this was, in Josephus's own words, in
the middle of the temple, and much the most probably in the court of
Israel only [for we have had no intimation that the zealots had at this
time profaned the court of the priests. See B. V. ch. 1. sect. 2].
Nor do I believe that our Josephus, who always insists on the peculiar
sacredness of the inmost court, and of the holy house that was in it,
would have omitted so material an aggravation of this barbarous murder,
as perpetrated in. a place so very holy, had that been the true place of
it. See Antiq. B. XI. ch. 7. sect. 1, and the note here on B. V. ch. 1.
sect. 2.]


10 (return) [ This prediction, that the city [Jerusalem] should then "be
taken, and the sanctuary burnt, by right of war, when a sedition should
invade Jews, and their own hands should pollute that temple;" or, as
it is B. VI. ch. 2. sect. 1, "when any one should begin to slay his
countrymen in the city;" is wanting in our present copies of the Old
Testament. See Essay on the Old Test. p. 104--112. But this prediction,
as Josephus well remarks here, though, with the other predictions of
the prophets, it was now laughed at by the seditious, was by their very
means soon exactly fulfilled. However, I cannot but here take notice
of Grotius's positive assertion upon Matthew 26:9, here quoted by Dr.
Hudson, that "it ought to be taken for granted, as a certain truth, that
many predictions of the Jewish prophets were preserved, not in writing,
but by memory." Whereas, it seems to me so far from certain, that I
think it has no evidence nor probability at all.]


11 (return) [ By these hiera, or "holy places," as distinct from cities,
must be meant "proseuchae," or "houses of prayer," out of cities; of
which we find mention made in the New Testament and other authors. See
Luke 6:12; Acts 16:13, 16; Antiq. B. XIV. ch. 10. sect. 23; his Life,
sect. 51. "In qua te quero proseucha?" Juvenal Sat. III. yet. 296. They
were situated sometimes by the sides of rivers, Acts 16:13, or by
the sea-side, Antiq. B. XIV. ch. 10. sect. 23. So did the seventy-two
interpreters go to pray every morning by the sea-side before they went
to their work, B. XII. ch. 2. sect. 12.]


12 (return) [ Gr. Galatia, and so everywhere.]


13 (return) [ Whether this Somorrhon, or Somorrha, ought not to be here
written Gomorrha, as some MSS. in a manner have it, [for the place meant
by Josephus seems to be near Segor, or Zoar, at the very south of
the Dead Sea, hard by which stood Sodom and Gomorrha,] cannot now be
certainly determined, but seems by no means improbable.]


14 (return) [ This excellent prayer of Elisha is wanting in our copies,
2 Kings 2:21, 22, though it be referred to also in the Apostolical
Constitutions, B. VII. ch. 37., and the success of it is mentioned in
them all.]


16 (return) [ Of these Roman affairs and tumults under Galba, Otho, and
Vitellius, here only touched upon by Josephus, see Tacitus, Suelonius,
and Dio, more largely. However, we may observe with Ottius, that
Josephus writes the name of the second of them not Otto, with many
others, but Otho, with the coins. See also the note on ch. 11. sect. 4.]


17 (return) [ Some of the ancients call this famous tree, or grove, an
oak others, a turpentine tree, or grove. It has been very famous in all
the past ages, and is so, I suppose, at this day; and that particularly
for an eminent mart or meeting of merchants there every year, as the
travelers inform us.]


18 (return) [ Puetonius differs hardly three days from Josephus, and
says Otho perished on the ninety-fifth day of his reign. In Anthon. See
the note on ch. 11. sect. 4.]


19 (return) [ This beginning and ending the observation of the Jewish
seventh day, or sabbath, with a priest's blowing of a trumpet, is
remarkable, and no where else mentioned, that I know of. Nor is Reland's
conjecture here improbable, that this was the very place that has
puzzled our commentators so long, called "Musach Sabbati," the "Covert
of the Sabbath," if that be the true reading, 2 Kings 16:18, because
here the proper priest stood dry, under a "covering," to proclaim the
beginning and ending of every Jewish sabbath.]


20 (return) [ The Roman authors that now remain say Vitellius had
children, whereas Josephus introduces here the Roman soldiers in Judea
saying he had none. Which of these assertions was the truth I know not.
Spanheim thinks he hath given a peculiar reason for calling Vitellius
"childless," though he really had children, Diss. de Num. p. 649, 650;
to which it appears very difficult to give our assent.]


21 (return) [ This brother of Vespasian was Flavius Sabinus, as
Suetonius informs us, in Vitell. sect. 15, and in Vespas. sect. 2. He is
also named by Josephus presently ch. 11. sect; 4.]


22 (return) [ It is plain by the nature of the thing, as well as by
Josephus and Eutropius, that Vespasian was first of all saluted emperor
in Judea, and not till some time afterward in Egypt. Whence Tacitus's
and Suetonius's present copies must be correct text, when they both say
that he was first proclaimed in Egypt, and that on the calends of July,
while they still say it was the fifth of the Nones or Ides of the same
July before he was proclaimed in Judea. I suppose the month they there
intended was June, and not July, as the copies now have it; nor does
Tacitus's coherence imply less. See Essay on the Revelation, p. 136.]


23 (return) [ Here we have an authentic description of the bounds and
circumstances of Egypt, in the days of Vespasian and Titus.]


24 (return) [ As Daniel was preferred by Darius and Cyrus, on account of
his having foretold the destruction of the Babylonian monarchy by their
means, and the consequent exaltation of the Medes and Persians, Daniel
5:6 or rather, as Jeremiah, when he was a prisoner, was set at liberty,
and honorably treated by Nebuzaradan, at the command of Nebuchadnezzar,
on account of his having foretold the destruction of Jerusalem by the
Babylonians, Jeremiah 40:1-7; so was our Josephus set at liberty, and
honorably treated, on account of his having foretold the advancement
of Vespasian and Titus to the Roman empire. All these are most eminent
instances of the interposition of Divine Providence, and of the
certainty of Divine predictions in the great revolutions of the four
monarchies. Several such-like examples there are, both in the sacred and
other histories, as in the case of Joseph in Egypt. and of Jaddua the
high priest, in the days of Alexander the Great, etc.]


25 (return) [ This is well observed by Josephus, that Vespasian, in
order to secure his success, and establish his government at first,
distributed his offices and places upon the foot of justice, and
bestowed them on such as best deserved them, and were best fit for
them. Which wise conduct in a mere heathen ought to put those rulers
and ministers of state to shame, who, professing Christianity, act
otherwise, and thereby expose themselves and their kingdoms to vice and
destruction.]


26 (return) [ The numbers in Josephus, ch. 9. sect. 2, 9, for Galba
seven months seven days, for Otho three months two days, and here
for Vitellius eight months five days, do not agree with any Roman
historians, who also disagree among themselves. And, indeed, Sealiger
justly complains, as Dr. Hudson observes on ch. 9. sect. 2, that this
period is very confused and uncertain in the ancient authors. They were
probably some of them contemporary together for some time; one of the
best evidences we have, I mean Ptolemy's Canon, omits them all, as if
they did not all together reign one whole year, nor had a single Thoth,
or new-year's day, [which then fell upon August 6,] in their entire
reigns. Dio also, who says that Vitellius reigned a year within ten
days, does yet estimate all their reigns together at no more than one
year, one month, and two days.]


27 (return) [ There are coins of this Casian Jupiter still extant.]







BOOK V.


     Containing The Interval Of Near Six Months.


     From The Coming Of Titus To Besiege Jerusalem, To The Great
     Extremity To Which The Jews Were Reduced.





CHAPTER 1.


     Concerning The Seditions At Jerusalem And What Terrible
     Miseries Afflicted The City By Their Means.

1. When therefore Titus had marched over that desert which lies between
Egypt and Syria, in the manner forementioned, he came to Cesarea, having
resolved to set his forces in order at that place, before he began the
war. Nay, indeed, while he was assisting his father at Alexandria, in
settling that government which had been newly conferred upon them by
God, it so happened that the sedition at Jerusalem was revived, and
parted into three factions, and that one faction fought against the
other; which partition in such evil cases may be said to be a good
thing, and the effect of Divine justice. Now as to the attack the
zealots made upon the people, and which I esteem the beginning of the
city's destruction, it hath been already explained after an accurate
manner; as also whence it arose, and to how great a mischief it was
increased. But for the present sedition, one should not mistake if he
called it a sedition begotten by another sedition, and to be like a
wild beast grown mad, which, for want of food from abroad, fell now upon
eating its own flesh.

2. For Eleazar, the son of Simon, who made the first separation of the
zealots from the people, and made them retire into the temple, appeared
very angry at John's insolent attempts, which he made everyday upon the
people; for this man never left off murdering; but the truth was, that
he could not bear to submit to a tyrant who set up after him. So he
being desirous of gaining the entire power and dominion to himself,
revolted from John, and took to his assistance Judas the son of
Chelcias, and Simon the son of Ezron, who were among the men of greatest
power. There was also with him Hezekiah, the son of Chobar, a person of
eminence. Each of these were followed by a great many of the zealots;
these seized upon the inner court of the temple 1 and laid their arms
upon the holy gates, and over the holy fronts of that court. And because
they had plenty of provisions, they were of good courage, for there
was a great abundance of what was consecrated to sacred uses, and they
scrupled not the making use of them; yet were they afraid, on account of
their small number; and when they had laid up their arms there, they did
not stir from the place they were in. Now as to John, what advantage
he had above Eleazar in the multitude of his followers, the like
disadvantage he had in the situation he was in, since he had his enemies
over his head; and as he could not make any assault upon them without
some terror, so was his anger too great to let them be at rest; nay,
although he suffered more mischief from Eleazar and his party than he
could inflict upon them, yet would he not leave off assaulting them,
insomuch that there were continual sallies made one against another, as
well as darts thrown at one another, and the temple was defiled every
where with murders.

3. But now the tyrant Simon, the son of Gioras, whom the people had
invited in, out of the hopes they had of his assistance in the great
distresses they were in, having in his power the upper city, and a great
part of the lower, did now make more vehement assaults upon John and
his party, because they were fought against from above also; yet was he
beneath their situation when he attacked them, as they were beneath the
attacks of the others above them. Whereby it came to pass that John did
both receive and inflict great damage, and that easily, as he was fought
against on both sides; and the same advantage that Eleazar and his party
had over him, since he was beneath them, the same advantage had he, by
his higher situation, over Simon. On which account he easily repelled
the attacks that were made from beneath, by the weapons thrown from
their hands only; but was obliged to repel those that threw their
darts from the temple above him, by his engines of war; for he had such
engines as threw darts, and javelins, and stones, and that in no small
number, by which he did not only defend himself from such as fought
against him, but slew moreover many of the priests, as they were about
their sacred ministrations. For notwithstanding these men were mad with
all sorts of impiety, yet did they still admit those that desired to
offer their sacrifices, although they took care to search the people of
their own country beforehand, and both suspected and watched them; while
they were not so much afraid of strangers, who, although they had gotten
leave of them, how cruel soever they were, to come into that court, were
yet often destroyed by this sedition; for those darts that were thrown
by the engines came with that force, that they went over all the
buildings, and reached as far as the altar, and the temple itself, and
fell upon the priests, and those 2 that were about the sacred offices;
insomuch that many persons who came thither with great zeal from the
ends of the earth, to offer sacrifices at this celebrated place, which
was esteemed holy by all mankind, fell down before their own sacrifices
themselves, and sprinkled that altar which was venerable among all men,
both Greeks and Barbarians, with their own blood; till the dead bodies
of strangers were mingled together with those of their own country, and
those of profane persons with those of the priests, and the blood of all
sorts of dead carcasses stood in lakes in the holy courts themselves.
And now, "O most wretched city, what misery so great as this didst thou
suffer from the Romans, when they came to purify thee from thy intestine
hatred! 'For thou couldst be no longer a place fit for God, nor couldst
thou long continue in being, after thou hadst been a sepulcher for
the bodies of thy own people, and hadst made the holy house itself a
burying-place in this civil war of thine. Yet mayst thou again grow
better, if perchance thou wilt hereafter appease the anger of that God
who is the author of thy destruction." But I must restrain myself from
these passions by the rules of history, since this is not a proper time
for domestical lamentations, but for historical narrations; I therefore
return to the operations that follow in this sedition. 3

4. And now there were three treacherous factions in the city, the one
parted from the other. Eleazar and his party, that kept the sacred
first-fruits, came against John in their cups. Those that were with John
plundered the populace, and went out with zeal against Simon. This
Simon had his supply of provisions from the city, in opposition to the
seditious. When, therefore, John was assaulted on both sides, he made
his men turn about, throwing his darts upon those citizens that came
up against him, from the cloisters he had in his possession, while he
opposed those that attacked him from the temple by his engines of war.
And if at any time he was freed from those that were above him, which
happened frequently, from their being drunk and tired, he sallied out
with a great number upon Simon and his party; and this he did always in
such parts of the city as he could come at, till he set on fire those
houses that were full of corn, and of all other provisions. 4 The same
thing was done by Simon, when, upon the other's retreat, he attacked the
city also; as if they had, on purpose, done it to serve the Romans,
by destroying what the city had laid up against the siege, and by thus
cutting off the nerves of their own power. Accordingly, it so came to
pass, that all the places that were about the temple were burnt down,
and were become an intermediate desert space, ready for fighting on both
sides of it; and that almost all that corn was burnt, which would have
been sufficient for a siege of many years. So they were taken by the
means of the famine, which it was impossible they should have been,
unless they had thus prepared the way for it by this procedure.

5. And now, as the city was engaged in a war on all sides, from these
treacherous crowds of wicked men, the people of the city, between them,
were like a great body torn in pieces. The aged men and the women were
in such distress by their internal calamities, that they wished for
the Romans, and earnestly hoped for an external war, in order to their
delivery from their domestical miseries. The citizens themselves were
under a terrible consternation and fear; nor had they any opportunity of
taking counsel, and of changing their conduct; nor were there any hopes
of coming to an agreement with their enemies; nor could such as had a
mind flee away; for guards were set at all places, and the heads of
the robbers, although they were seditious one against another in other
respects, yet did they agree in killing those that were for peace with
the Romans, or were suspected of an inclination to desert them, as their
common enemies. They agreed in nothing but this, to kill those that were
innocent. The noise also of those that were fighting was incessant, both
by day and by night; but the lamentations of those that mourned exceeded
the other; nor was there ever any occasion for them to leave off
their lamentations, because their calamities came perpetually one upon
another, although the deep consternation they were in prevented their
outward wailing; but being constrained by their fear to conceal their
inward passions, they were inwardly tormented, without daring to open
their lips in groans. Nor was any regard paid to those that were still
alive, by their relations; nor was there any care taken of burial for
those that were dead; the occasion of both which was this, that every
one despaired of himself; for those that were not among the seditious
had no great desires of any thing, as expecting for certain that they
should very soon be destroyed; but for the seditious themselves, they
fought against each other, while they trod upon the dead bodies as they
lay heaped one upon another, and taking up a mad rage from those dead
bodies that were under their feet, became the fiercer thereupon. They,
moreover, were still inventing somewhat or other that was pernicious
against themselves; and when they had resolved upon any thing, they
executed it without mercy, and omitted no method of torment or of
barbarity. Nay, John abused the sacred materials, 5 and employed them in
the construction of his engines of war; for the people and the priests
had formerly determined to support the temple, and raise the holy house
twenty cubits higher; for king Agrippa had at a very great expense, and
with very great pains, brought thither such materials as were proper for
that purpose, being pieces of timber very well worth seeing, both for
their straightness and their largeness; but the war coming on, and
interrupting the work, John had them cut, and prepared for the building
him towers, he finding them long enough to oppose from them those his
adversaries that thought him from the temple that was above him. He also
had them brought and erected behind the inner court over against the
west end of the cloisters, where alone he could erect them; whereas the
other sides of that court had so many steps as would not let them come
nigh enough the cloisters.

6. Thus did John hope to be too hard for his enemies by these engines
constructed by his impiety; but God himself demonstrated that his pains
would prove of no use to him, by bringing the Romans upon him, before
he had reared any of his towers; for Titus, when he had gotten together
part of his forces about him, and had ordered the rest to meet him at
Jerusalem, marched out of Cesarea. He had with him those three legions
that had accompanied his father when he laid Judea waste, together with
that twelfth legion which had been formerly beaten with Cestius; which
legion, as it was otherwise remarkable for its valor, so did it march
on now with greater alacrity to avenge themselves on the Jews, as
remembering what they had formerly suffered from them. Of these legions
he ordered the fifth to meet him, by going through Emmaus, and the tenth
to go up by Jericho; he also moved himself, together with the rest;
besides whom, marched those auxiliaries that came from the kings, being
now more in number than before, together with a considerable number that
came to his assistance from Syria. Those also that had been selected out
of these four legions, and sent with Mucianus to Italy, had their places
filled up out of these soldiers that came out of Egypt with Titus; who
were two thousand men, chosen out of the armies at Alexandria. There
followed him also three thousand drawn from those that guarded the river
Euphrates; as also there came Tiberius Alexander, who was a friend of
his, most valuable, both for his good-will to him, and for his prudence.
He had formerly been governor of Alexandria, but was now thought worthy
to be general of the army [under Titus]. The reason of this was, that he
had been the first who encouraged Vespasian very lately to accept this
his new dominion, and joined himself to him with great fidelity, when
things were uncertain, and fortune had not yet declared for him. He also
followed Titus as a counselor, very useful to him in this war, both by
his age and skill in such affairs.






CHAPTER 2.


     How Titus Marched To Jerusalem, And How He Was In Danger As
     He Was Taking A View Of The City Of The Place Also Where He
     Pitched His Camp

1. Now, as Titus was upon his march into the enemy's country, the
auxiliaries that were sent by the kings marched first, having all the
other auxiliaries with them; after whom followed those that were to
prepare the roads and measure out the camp; then came the commander's
baggage, and after that the other soldiers, who were completely armed
to support them; then came Titus himself, having with him another select
body; and then came the pikemen; after whom came the horse belonging to
that legion. All these came before the engines; and after these engines
came the tribunes and the leaders of the cohorts, with their select
bodies; after these came the ensigns, with the eagle; and before those
ensigns came the trumpeters belonging to them; next these came the main
body of the army in their ranks, every rank being six deep; the servants
belonging to every legion came after these; and before these last their
baggage; the mercenaries came last, and those that guarded them brought
up the rear. Now Titus, according to the Roman usage, went in the
front of the army after a decent manner, and marched through Samaria to
Gophna, a city that had been formerly taken by his father, and was then
garrisoned by Roman soldiers; and when he had lodged there one night, he
marched on in the morning; and when he had gone as far as a day's march,
he pitched his camp at that valley which the Jews, in their own tongue,
call "the Valley of Thorns," near a certain village called Gabaothsath,
which signifies "the Hill of Saul," being distant from Jerusalem about
thirty furlongs. 6 There it was that he chose out six hundred select
horsemen, and went to take a view of the city, to observe what strength
it was of, and how courageous the Jews were; whether, when they saw him,
and before they came to a direct battle, they would be affrighted and
submit; for he had been informed what was really true, that the people
who were fallen under the power of the seditious and the robbers were
greatly desirous of peace; but being too weak to rise up against the
rest, they lay still.

2. Now, so long as he rode along the straight road which led to the wall
of the city, nobody appeared out of the gates; but when he went out of
that road, and declined towards the tower Psephinus, and led the band of
horsemen obliquely, an immense number of the Jews leaped out suddenly at
the towers called the "Women's Towers," through that gate which was over
against the monuments of queen Helena, and intercepted his horse; and
standing directly opposite to those that still ran along the road,
hindered them from joining those that had declined out of it. They
intercepted Titus also, with a few other. Now it was here impossible for
him to go forward, because all the places had trenches dug in them from
the wall, to preserve the gardens round about, and were full of gardens
obliquely situated, and of many hedges; and to return back to his own
men, he saw it was also impossible, by reason of the multitude of the
enemies that lay between them; many of whom did not so much as know that
the king was in any danger, but supposed him still among them. So he
perceived that his preservation must be wholly owing to his own courage,
and turned his horse about, and cried out aloud to those that were about
him to follow him, and ran with violence into the midst of his enemies,
in order to force his way through them to his own men. And hence we may
principally learn, that both the success of wars, and the dangers that
kings 7 are in, are under the providence of God; for while such a number
of darts were thrown at Titus, when he had neither his head-piece on,
nor his breastplate, [for, as I told you, he went out not to fight, but
to view the city,] none of them touched his body, but went aside without
hurting him; as if all of them missed him on purpose, and only made a
noise as they passed by him. So he diverted those perpetually with his
sword that came on his side, and overturned many of those that directly
met him, and made his horse ride over those that were overthrown. The
enemy indeed made a shout at the boldness of Caesar, and exhorted one
another to rush upon him. Yet did these against whom he marched fly
away, and go off from him in great numbers; while those that were in the
same danger with him kept up close to him, though they were wounded both
on their backs and on their sides; for they had each of them but this
one hope of escaping, if they could assist Titus in opening himself a
way, that he might not be encompassed round by his enemies before he got
away from them. Now there were two of those that were with him, but at
some distance; the one of which the enemy compassed round, and slew
him with their darts, and his horse also; but the other they slew as
he leaped down from his horse, and carried off his horse with them. But
Titus escaped with the rest, and came safe to the camp. So this
success of the Jews' first attack raised their minds, and gave them an
ill-grounded hope; and this short inclination of fortune, on their side,
made them very courageous for the future.

3. But now, as soon as that legion that had been at Emmaus was joined to
Caesar at night, he removed thence, when it was day, and came to a place
called Seopus; from whence the city began already to be seen, and a
plain view might be taken of the great temple. Accordingly, this place,
on the north quarter of the city, and joining thereto, was a plain, and
very properly named Scopus, [the prospect,] and was no more than seven
furlongs distant from it. And here it was that Titus ordered a camp
to be fortified for two legions that were to be together; but ordered
another camp to be fortified, at three furlongs farther distance behind
them, for the fifth legion; for he thought that, by marching in the
night, they might be tired, and might deserve to be covered from the
enemy, and with less fear might fortify themselves; and as these were
now beginning to build, the tenth legion, who came through Jericho,
was already come to the place, where a certain party of armed men had
formerly lain, to guard that pass into the city, and had been taken
before by Vespasian. These legions had orders to encamp at the distance
of six furlongs from Jerusalem, at the mount called the Mount of Olives
8 which lies over against the city on the east side, and is parted from
it by a deep valley, interposed between them, which is named Cedron.

4. Now when hitherto the several parties in the city had been dashing
one against another perpetually, this foreign war, now suddenly
come upon them after a violent manner, put the first stop to their
contentions one against another; and as the seditious now saw with
astonishment the Romans pitching three several camps, they began to
think of an awkward sort of concord, and said one to another, "What do
we here, and what do we mean, when we suffer three fortified walls to be
built to coop us in, that we shall not be able to breathe freely? while
the enemy is securely building a kind of city in opposition to us, and
while we sit still within our own walls, and become spectators only of
what they are doing, with our hands idle, and our armor laid by, as if
they were about somewhat that was for our good and advantage. We are, it
seems, [so did they cry out,] only courageous against ourselves,
while the Romans are likely to gain the city without bloodshed by our
sedition." Thus did they encourage one another when they were gotten
together, and took their armor immediately, and ran out upon the tenth
legion, and fell upon the Romans with great eagerness, and with a
prodigious shout, as they were fortifying their camp. These Romans were
caught in different parties, and this in order to perform their several
works, and on that account had in great measure laid aside their arms;
for they thought the Jews would not have ventured to make a sally upon
them; and had they been disposed so to do, they supposed their sedition
would have distracted them. So they were put into disorder unexpectedly;
when some of them left their works they were about, and immediately
marched off, while many ran to their arms, but were smitten and slain
before they could turn back upon the enemy. The Jews became still more
and more in number, as encouraged by the good success of those that
first made the attack; and while they had such good fortune, they seemed
both to themselves and to the enemy to be many more than they really
were. The disorderly way of their fighting at first put the Romans also
to a stand, who had been constantly used to fight skillfully in good
order, and with keeping their ranks, and obeying the orders that were
given them; for which reason the Romans were caught unexpectedly, and
were obliged to give way to the assaults that were made upon them. Now
when these Romans were overtaken, and turned back upon the Jews, they
put a stop to their career; yet when they did not take care enough of
themselves through the vehemency of their pursuit, they were wounded
by them; but as still more and more Jews sallied out of the city, the
Romans were at length brought into confusion, and put to flight, and
ran away from their camp. Nay, things looked as though the entire legion
would have been in danger, unless Titus had been informed of the case
they were in, and had sent them succors immediately. So he reproached
them for their cowardice, and brought those back that were running away,
and fell himself upon the Jews on their flank, with those select troops
that were with him, and slew a considerable number, and wounded more of
them, and put them all to flight, and made them run away hastily down
the valley. Now as these Jews suffered greatly in the declivity of the
valley, so when they were gotten over it, they turned about, and stood
over against the Romans, having the valley between them, and there
fought with them. Thus did they continue the fight till noon; but when
it was already a little after noon, Titus set those that came to the
assistance of the Romans with him, and those that belonged to the
cohorts, to prevent the Jews from making any more sallies, and then sent
the rest of the legion to the upper part of the mountain, to fortify
their camp.

5. This march of the Romans seemed to the Jews to be a flight; and as
the watchman who was placed upon the wall gave a signal by shaking his
garment, there came out a fresh multitude of Jews, and that with such
mighty violence, that one might compare it to the running of the most
terrible wild beasts. To say the truth, none of those that opposed them
could sustain the fury with which they made their attacks; but, as if
they had been cast out of an engine, they brake the enemies' ranks to
pieces, who were put to flight, and ran away to the mountain; none but
Titus himself, and a few others with him, being left in the midst of the
acclivity. Now these others, who were his friends, despised the danger
they were in, and were ashamed to leave their general, earnestly
exhorting him to give way to these Jews that are fond of dying, and not
to run into such dangers before those that ought to stay before him;
to consider what his fortune was, and not, by supplying the place of a
common soldier, to venture to turn back upon the enemy so suddenly; and
this because he was general in the war, and lord of the habitable
earth, on whose preservation the public affairs do all depend. These
persuasions Titus seemed not so much as to hear, but opposed those that
ran upon him, and smote them on the face; and when he had forced them to
go back, he slew them: he also fell upon great numbers as they marched
down the hill, and thrust them forward; while those men were so amazed
at his courage and his strength, that they could not fly directly to the
city, but declined from him on both sides, and pressed after those that
fled up the hill; yet did he still fall upon their flank, and put a stop
to their fury. In the mean time, a disorder and a terror fell again upon
those that were fortifying their camp at the top of the hill, upon their
seeing those beneath them running away; insomuch that the whole legion
was dispersed, while they thought that the sallies of the Jews upon them
were plainly insupportable, and that Titus was himself put to flight;
because they took it for granted, that, if he had staid, the rest would
never have fled for it. Thus were they encompassed on every side by
a kind of panic fear, and some dispersed themselves one way, and some
another, till certain of them saw their general in the very midst of an
action, and being under great concern for him, they loudly proclaimed
the danger he was in to the entire legion; and now shame made them turn
back, and they reproached one another that they did worse than run away,
by deserting Caesar. So they used their utmost force against the Jews,
and declining from the straight declivity, they drove them on heaps into
the bottom of the valley. Then did the Jews turn about and fight them;
but as they were themselves retiring, and now, because the Romans had
the advantage of the ground, and were above the Jews, they drove them
all into the valley. Titus also pressed upon those that were near him,
and sent the legion again to fortify their camp; while he, and those
that were with him before, opposed the enemy, and kept them from doing
further mischief; insomuch that, if I may be allowed neither to add any
thing out of flattery, nor to diminish any thing out of envy, but to
speak the plain truth, Caesar did twice deliver that entire legion when
it was in jeopardy, and gave them a quiet opportunity of fortifying
their camp.






CHAPTER 3.


     How The Sedition Was Again Revived Within Jerusalem And Yet
     The Jews Contrived Snares For The Romans. How Titus Also
     Threatened His Soldiers For Their Ungovernable Rashness.

1. As now the war abroad ceased for a while, the sedition within was
revived; and on the feast of unleavened bread, which was now come, it
being the fourteenth day of the month Xanthicus, [Nisan,] when it is
believed the Jews were first freed from the Egyptians, Eleazar and
his party opened the gates of this [inmost court of the] temple, and
admitted such of the people as were desirous to worship God into it.
9 But John made use of this festival as a cloak for his treacherous
designs, and armed the most inconsiderable of his own party, the greater
part of whom were not purified, with weapons concealed under their
garments, and sent them with great zeal into the temple, in order to
seize upon it; which armed men, when they were gotten in, threw their
garments away, and presently appeared in their armor. Upon which there
was a very great disorder and disturbance about the holy house; while
the people, who had no concern in the sedition, supposed that this
assault was made against all without distinction, as the zealots thought
it was made against themselves only. So these left off guarding the
gates any longer, and leaped down from their battlements before they
came to an engagement, and fled away into the subterranean caverns of
the temple; while the people that stood trembling at the altar, and
about the holy house, were rolled on heaps together, and trampled upon,
and were beaten both with wooden and with iron weapons without mercy.
Such also as had differences with others slew many persons that were
quiet, out of their own private enmity and hatred, as if they were
opposite to the seditious; and all those that had formerly offended
any of these plotters were now known, and were now led away to the
slaughter; and when they had done abundance of horrid mischief to the
guiltless, they granted a truce to the guilty, and let those go off that
came out of the caverns. These followers of John also did now seize upon
this inner temple, and upon all the warlike engines therein, and then
ventured to oppose Simon. And thus that sedition, which had been divided
into three factions, was now reduced to two.

2. But Titus, intending to pitch his camp nearer to the city than
Scopus, placed as many of his choice horsemen and footmen as he thought
sufficient opposite to the Jews, to prevent their sallying out upon
them, while he gave orders for the whole army to level the distance, as
far as the wall of the city. So they threw down all the hedges and walls
which the inhabitants had made about their gardens and groves of trees,
and cut down all the fruit trees that lay between them and the wall
of the city, and filled up all the hollow places and the chasms, and
demolished the rocky precipices with iron instruments; and thereby made
all the place level from Scopus to Herod's monuments, which adjoined to
the pool called the Serpent's Pool.

3. Now at this very time the Jews contrived the following stratagem
against the Romans. The bolder sort of the seditious went out at the
towers, called the Women's Towers, as if they had been ejected out of
the city by those who were for peace, and rambled about as if they
were afraid of being assaulted by the Romans, and were in fear of one
another; while those that stood upon the wall, and seemed to be of the
people's side, cried out aloud for peace, and entreated they might
have security for their lives given them, and called for the Romans,
promising to open the gates to them; and as they cried out after that
manner, they threw stones at their own people, as though they would
drive them away from the gates. These also pretended that they were
excluded by force, and that they petitioned those that were within to
let them in; and rushing upon the Romans perpetually, with violence,
they then came back, and seemed to be in great disorder. Now the Roman
soldiers thought this cunning stratagem of theirs was to be believed
real, and thinking they had the one party under their power, and could
punish them as they pleased, and hoping that the other party would open
their gates to them, set to the execution of their designs accordingly.
But for Titus himself, he had this surprising conduct of the Jews
in suspicion; for whereas he had invited them to come to terms of
accommodation, by Josephus, but one day before, he could then receive
no civil answer from them; so he ordered the soldiers to stay where
they were. However, some of them that were set in the front of the works
prevented him, and catching up their arms ran to the gates; whereupon
those that seemed to have been ejected at the first retired; but as soon
as the soldiers were gotten between the towers on each side of the gate,
the Jews ran out and encompassed them round, and fell upon them behind,
while that multitude which stood upon the wall threw a heap of stones
and darts of all kinds at them, insomuch that they slew a considerable
number, and wounded many more; for it was not easy for the Romans to
escape, by reason those behind them pressed them forward; besides which,
the shame they were under for being mistaken, and the fear they were
in of their commanders, engaged them to persevere in their mistake;
wherefore they fought with their spears a great while, and received many
blows from the Jews, though indeed they gave them as many blows again,
and at last repelled those that had encompassed them about, while the
Jews pursued them as they retired, and followed them, and threw darts at
them as far as the monuments of queen Helena.

4. After this these Jews, without keeping any decorum, grew insolent
upon their good fortune, and jested upon the Romans for being deluded by
the trick they had put upon them, and making a noise with beating their
shields, leaped for gladness, and made joyful exclamations; while these
soldiers were received with threatenings by their officers, and with
indignation by Caesar himself, [who spake to them thus]: These Jews,
who are only conducted by their madness, do every thing with care and
circumspection; they contrive stratagems, and lay ambushes, and fortune
gives success to their stratagems, because they are obedient, and
preserve their goodwill and fidelity to one another; while the Romans,
to whom fortune uses to be ever subservient, by reason of their good
order, and ready submission to their commanders, have now had ill
success by their contrary behavior, and by not being able to restrain
their hands from action, they have been caught; and that which is the
most to their reproach, they have gone on without their commanders,
in the very presence of Caesar. "Truly," says Titus, "the laws of war
cannot but groan heavily, as will my father also himself, when he shall
be informed of this wound that hath been given us, since he who is grown
old in wars did never make so great a mistake. Our laws of war do also
ever inflict capital punishment on those that in the least break into
good order, while at this time they have seen an entire army run into
disorder. However, those that have been so insolent shall be made
immediately sensible, that even they who conquer among the Romans
without orders for fighting are to be under disgrace." When Titus had
enlarged upon this matter before the commanders, it appeared evident
that he would execute the law against all those that were concerned; so
these soldiers' minds sunk down in despair, as expecting to be put to
death, and that justly and quickly. However, the other legions came
round about Titus, and entreated his favor to these their fellow
soldiers, and made supplication to him, that he would pardon the
rashness of a few, on account of the better obedience of all the rest;
and promised for them that they should make amends for their present
fault, by their more virtuous behavior for the time to come.

5. So Caesar complied with their desires, and with what prudence
dictated to him also; for he esteemed it fit to punish single persons
by real executions, but that the punishment of great multitudes should
proceed no further than reproofs; so he was reconciled to the soldiers,
but gave them a special charge to act more wisely for the future; and
he considered with himself how he might be even with the Jews for their
stratagem. And now when the space between the Romans and the wall had
been leveled, which was done in four days, and as he was desirous to
bring the baggage of the army, with the rest of the multitude that
followed him, safely to the camp, he set the strongest part of his army
over against that wall which lay on the north quarter of the city, and
over against the western part of it, and made his army seven deep, with
the foot-men placed before them, and the horsemen behind them, each of
the last in three ranks, whilst the archers stood in the midst in seven
ranks. And now as the Jews were prohibited, by so great a body of men,
from making sallies upon the Romans, both the beasts that bare the
burdens, and belonged to the three legions, and the rest of the
multitude, marched on without any fear. But as for Titus himself, he was
but about two furlongs distant from the wall, at that part of it
where was the corner 10 and over against that tower which was called
Psephinus, at which tower the compass of the wall belonging to the north
bended, and extended itself over against the west; but the other part of
the army fortified itself at the tower called Hippicus, and was distant,
in like manner, by two furlongs from the city. However, the tenth legion
continued in its own place, upon the Mount of Olives.






CHAPTER 4.


     The Description Of Jerusalem.

1. The city of Jerusalem was fortified with three walls, on such parts
as were not encompassed with unpassable valleys; for in such places it
had but one wall. The city was built upon two hills, which are opposite
to one another, and have a valley to divide them asunder; at which
valley the corresponding rows of houses on both hills end. Of these
hills, that which contains the upper city is much higher, and in length
more direct. Accordingly, it was called the "Citadel," by king David; he
was the father of that Solomon who built this temple at the first; but
it is by us called the "Upper Market-place." But the other hill, which
was called "Acra," and sustains the lower city, is of the shape of a
moon when she is horned; over against this there was a third hill, but
naturally lower than Acra, and parted formerly from the other by a broad
valley. However, in those times when the Asamoneans reigned, they
filled up that valley with earth, and had a mind to join the city to the
temple. They then took off part of the height of Acra, and reduced it
to be of less elevation than it was before, that the temple might be
superior to it. Now the Valley of the Cheesemongers, as it was called,
and was that which we told you before distinguished the hill of the
upper city from that of the lower, extended as far as Siloam; for that
is the name of a fountain which hath sweet water in it, and this in
great plenty also. But on the outsides, these hills are surrounded by
deep valleys, and by reason of the precipices to them belonging on both
sides they are every where unpassable.

2. Now, of these three walls, the old one was hard to be taken, both by
reason of the valleys, and of that hill on which it was built, and which
was above them. But besides that great advantage, as to the place where
they were situated, it was also built very strong; because David and
Solomon, and the following kings, were very zealous about this work.
Now that wall began on the north, at the tower called "Hippicus," and
extended as far as the "Xistus," a place so called, and then, joining to
the council-house, ended at the west cloister of the temple. But if
we go the other way westward, it began at the same place, and extended
through a place called "Bethso," to the gate of the Essens; and after
that it went southward, having its bending above the fountain Siloam,
where it also bends again towards the east at Solomon's pool, and
reaches as far as a certain place which they called "Ophlas," where it
was joined to the eastern cloister of the temple. The second wall took
its beginning from that gate which they called "Gennath," which belonged
to the first wall; it only encompassed the northern quarter of the city,
and reached as far as the tower Antonia. The beginning of the third wall
was at the tower Hippicus, whence it reached as far as the north quarter
of the city, and the tower Psephinus, and then was so far extended till
it came over against the monuments of Helena, which Helena was queen of
Adiabene, the daughter of Izates; it then extended further to a great
length, and passed by the sepulchral caverns of the kings, and bent
again at the tower of the corner, at the monument which is called the
"Monument of the Fuller," and joined to the old wall at the valley
called the "Valley of Cedron." It was Agrippa who encompassed the parts
added to the old city with this wall, which had been all naked before;
for as the city grew more populous, it gradually crept beyond its old
limits, and those parts of it that stood northward of the temple,
and joined that hill to the city, made it considerably larger, and
occasioned that hill, which is in number the fourth, and is called
"Bezetha," to be inhabited also. It lies over against the tower Antonia,
but is divided from it by a deep valley, which was dug on purpose, and
that in order to hinder the foundations of the tower of Antonia from
joining to this hill, and thereby affording an opportunity for getting
to it with ease, and hindering the security that arose from its superior
elevation; for which reason also that depth of the ditch made the
elevation of the towers more remarkable. This new-built part of the
city was called "Bezetha," in our language, which, if interpreted in the
Grecian language, may be called "the New City." Since, therefore, its
inhabitants stood in need of a covering, the father of the present king,
and of the same name with him, Agrippa, began that wall we spoke of; but
he left off building it when he had only laid the foundations, out of
the fear he was in of Claudius Caesar, lest he should suspect that
so strong a wall was built in order to make some innovation in public
affairs; for the city could no way have been taken if that wall had
been finished in the manner it was begun; as its parts were connected
together by stones twenty cubits long, and ten cubits broad, which could
never have been either easily undermined by any iron tools, or shaken
by any engines. The wall was, however, ten cubits wide, and it would
probably have had a height greater than that, had not his zeal who began
it been hindered from exerting itself. After this, it was erected with
great diligence by the Jews, as high as twenty cubits, above which it
had battlements of two cubits, and turrets of three cubits altitude,
insomuch that the entire altitude extended as far as twenty-five cubits.

3. Now the towers that were upon it were twenty cubits in breadth, and
twenty cubits in height; they were square and solid, as was the wall
itself, wherein the niceness of the joints, and the beauty of the
stones, were no way inferior to those of the holy house itself. Above
this solid altitude of the towers, which was twenty cubits, there were
rooms of great magnificence, and over them upper rooms, and cisterns to
receive rain-water. They were many in number, and the steps by which you
ascended up to them were every one broad: of these towers then the
third wall had ninety, and the spaces between them were each two hundred
cubits; but in the middle wall were forty towers, and the old wall was
parted into sixty, while the whole compass of the city was thirty-three
furlongs. Now the third wall was all of it wonderful; yet was the tower
Psephinus elevated above it at the north-west corner, and there Titus
pitched his own tent; for being seventy cubits high it both afforded a
prospect of Arabia at sun-rising, as well as it did of the utmost limits
of the Hebrew possessions at the sea westward. Moreover, it was an
octagon, and over against it was the tower Hipplicus, and hard by two
others were erected by king Herod, in the old wall. These were for
largeness, beauty, and strength beyond all that were in the habitable
earth; for besides the magnanimity of his nature, and his magnificence
towards the city on other occasions, he built these after such an
extraordinary manner, to gratify his own private affections, and
dedicated these towers to the memory of those three persons who had been
the dearest to him, and from whom he named them. They were his brother,
his friend, and his wife. This wife he had slain, out of his love [and
jealousy], as we have already related; the other two he lost in war, as
they were courageously fighting. Hippicus, so named from his friend,
was square; its length and breadth were each twenty-five cubits, and its
height thirty, and it had no vacuity in it. Over this solid building,
which was composed of great stones united together, there was a
reservoir twenty cubits deep, over which there was a house of two
stories, whose height was twenty-five cubits, and divided into several
parts; over which were battlements of two cubits, and turrets all round
of three cubits high, insomuch that the entire height added together
amounted to fourscore cubits. The second tower, which he named from his
brother Phasaelus, had its breadth and its height equal, each of them
forty cubits; over which was its solid height of forty cubits; over
which a cloister went round about, whose height was ten cubits, and it
was covered from enemies by breast-works and bulwarks. There was also
built over that cloister another tower, parted into magnificent rooms,
and a place for bathing; so that this tower wanted nothing that
might make it appear to be a royal palace. It was also adorned with
battlements and turrets, more than was the foregoing, and the entire
altitude was about ninety cubits; the appearance of it resembled the
tower of Pharus, which exhibited a fire to such as sailed to Alexandria,
but was much larger than it in compass. This was now converted to a
house, wherein Simon exercised his tyrannical authority. The third tower
was Mariamne, for that was his queen's name; it was solid as high as
twenty cubits; its breadth and its length were twenty cubits, and were
equal to each other; its upper buildings were more magnificent, and had
greater variety, than the other towers had; for the king thought it most
proper for him to adorn that which was denominated from his wife, better
than those denominated from men, as those were built stronger than this
that bore his wife's name. The entire height of this tower was fifty
cubits.

4. Now as these towers were so very tall, they appeared much taller by
the place on which they stood; for that very old wall wherein they were
was built on a high hill, and was itself a kind of elevation that was
still thirty cubits taller; over which were the towers situated, and
thereby were made much higher to appearance. The largeness also of the
stones was wonderful; for they were not made of common small stones,
nor of such large ones only as men could carry, but they were of white
marble, cut out of the rock; each stone was twenty cubits in length, and
ten in breadth, and five in depth. They were so exactly united to
one another, that each tower looked like one entire rock of stone, so
growing naturally, and afterward cut by the hand of the artificers into
their present shape and corners; so little, or not at all, did their
joints or connexion appear low as these towers were themselves on the
north side of the wall, the king had a palace inwardly thereto adjoined,
which exceeds all my ability to describe it; for it was so very curious
as to want no cost nor skill in its construction, but was entirely
walled about to the height of thirty cubits, and was adorned with towers
at equal distances, and with large bed-chambers, that would contain beds
for a hundred guests a-piece, in which the variety of the stones is not
to be expressed; for a large quantity of those that were rare of that
kind was collected together. Their roofs were also wonderful, both for
the length of the beams, and the splendor of their ornaments. The number
of the rooms was also very great, and the variety of the figures that
were about them was prodigious; their furniture was complete, and the
greatest part of the vessels that were put in them was of silver and
gold. There were besides many porticoes, one beyond another, round
about, and in each of those porticoes curious pillars; yet were all
the courts that were exposed to the air every where green. There were,
moreover, several groves of trees, and long walks through them, with
deep canals, and cisterns, that in several parts were filled with
brazen statues, through which the water ran out. There were withal many
dove-courts 11 of tame pigeons about the canals. But indeed it is not
possible to give a complete description of these palaces; and the very
remembrance of them is a torment to one, as putting one in mind what
vastly rich buildings that fire which was kindled by the robbers hath
consumed; for these were not burnt by the Romans, but by these internal
plotters, as we have already related, in the beginning of their
rebellion. That fire began at the tower of Antonia, and went on to the
palaces, and consumed the upper parts of the three towers themselves.






CHAPTER 5.


     A Description Of The Temple.

1. Now this temple, as I have already said, was built upon a strong
hill. At first the plain at the top was hardly sufficient for the holy
house and the altar, for the ground about it was very uneven, and like
a precipice; but when king Solomon, who was the person that built the
temple, had built a wall to it on its east side, there was then added
one cloister founded on a bank cast up for it, and on the other parts
the holy house stood naked. But in future ages the people added new
banks, 12 and the hill became a larger plain. They then broke down the
wall on the north side, and took in as much as sufficed afterward for
the compass of the entire temple. And when they had built walls on three
sides of the temple round about, from the bottom of the hill, and had
performed a work that was greater than could be hoped for, [in which
work long ages were spent by them, as well as all their sacred treasures
were exhausted, which were still replenished by those tributes which
were sent to God from the whole habitable earth,] they then encompassed
their upper courts with cloisters, as well as they [afterward] did the
lowest [court of the] temple. The lowest part of this was erected to the
height of three hundred cubits, and in some places more; yet did not
the entire depth of the foundations appear, for they brought earth, and
filled up the valleys, as being desirous to make them on a level with
the narrow streets of the city; wherein they made use of stones of forty
cubits in magnitude; for the great plenty of money they then had, and
the liberality of the people, made this attempt of theirs to succeed to
an incredible degree; and what could not be so much as hoped for as ever
to be accomplished, was, by perseverance and length of time, brought to
perfection.

2. Now for the works that were above these foundations, these were not
unworthy of such foundations; for all the cloisters were double, and
the pillars to them belonging were twenty-five cubits in height, and
supported the cloisters. These pillars were of one entire stone each of
them, and that stone was white marble; and the roofs were adorned with
cedar, curiously graven. The natural magnificence, and excellent polish,
and the harmony of the joints in these cloisters, afforded a prospect
that was very remarkable; nor was it on the outside adorned with any
work of the painter or engraver. The cloisters [of the outmost court]
were in breadth thirty cubits, while the entire compass of it was by
measure six furlongs, including the tower of Antonia; those entire
courts that were exposed to the air were laid with stones of all sorts.
When you go through these [first] cloisters, unto the second [court of
the] temple, there was a partition made of stone all round, whose height
was three cubits: its construction was very elegant; upon it stood
pillars, at equal distances from one another, declaring the law of
purity, some in Greek, and some in Roman letters, that "no foreigner
should go within that sanctuary" for that second [court of the] temple
was called "the Sanctuary," and was ascended to by fourteen steps from
the first court. This court was four-square, and had a wall about it
peculiar to itself; the height of its buildings, although it were on the
outside forty cubits, 13 was hidden by the steps, and on the inside that
height was but twenty-five cubits; for it being built over against a
higher part of the hill with steps, it was no further to be entirely
discerned within, being covered by the hill itself. Beyond these
thirteen steps there was the distance of ten cubits; this was all plain;
whence there were other steps, each of five cubits a-piece, that led to
the gates, which gates on the north and south sides were eight, on each
of those sides four, and of necessity two on the east. For since there
was a partition built for the women on that side, as the proper place
wherein they were to worship, there was a necessity for a second gate
for them: this gate was cut out of its wall, over against the first
gate. There was also on the other sides one southern and one northern
gate, through which was a passage into the court of the women; for as
to the other gates, the women were not allowed to pass through them;
nor when they went through their own gate could they go beyond their own
wall. This place was allotted to the women of our own country, and
of other countries, provided they were of the same nation, and that
equally. The western part of this court had no gate at all, but the wall
was built entire on that side. But then the cloisters which were betwixt
the gates extended from the wall inward, before the chambers; for they
were supported by very fine and large pillars. These cloisters were
single, and, excepting their magnitude, were no way inferior to those of
the lower court.

3. Now nine of these gates were on every side covered over with gold and
silver, as were the jambs of their doors and their lintels; but there
was one gate that was without the [inward court of the] holy house,
which was of Corinthian brass, and greatly excelled those that were only
covered over with silver and gold. Each gate had two doors, whose height
was severally thirty cubits, and their breadth fifteen. However, they
had large spaces within of thirty cubits, and had on each side rooms,
and those, both in breadth and in length, built like towers, and their
height was above forty cubits. Two pillars did also support these rooms,
and were in circumference twelve cubits. Now the magnitudes of the other
gates were equal one to another; but that over the Corinthian gate,
which opened on the east over against the gate of the holy house itself,
was much larger; for its height was fifty cubits; and its doors were
forty cubits; and it was adorned after a most costly manner, as having
much richer and thicker plates of silver and gold upon them than the
other. These nine gates had that silver and gold poured upon them by
Alexander, the father of Tiberius. Now there were fifteen steps, which
led away from the wall of the court of the women to this greater gate;
whereas those that led thither from the other gates were five steps
shorter.

4. As to the holy house itself, which was placed in the midst [of the
inmost court], that most sacred part of the temple, it was ascended to
by twelve steps; and in front its height and its breadth were equal, and
each a hundred cubits, though it was behind forty cubits narrower; for
on its front it had what may be styled shoulders on each side, that
passed twenty cubits further. Its first gate was seventy cubits high,
and twenty-five cubits broad; but this gate had no doors; for it
represented the universal visibility of heaven, and that it cannot be
excluded from any place. Its front was covered with gold all over, and
through it the first part of the house, that was more inward, did all of
it appear; which, as it was very large, so did all the parts about the
more inward gate appear to shine to those that saw them; but then, as
the entire house was divided into two parts within, it was only the
first part of it that was open to our view. Its height extended all
along to ninety cubits in height, and its length was fifty cubits, and
its breadth twenty. But that gate which was at this end of the first
part of the house was, as we have already observed, all over covered
with gold, as was its whole wall about it; it had also golden vines
above it, from which clusters of grapes hung as tall as a man's height.
But then this house, as it was divided into two parts, the inner part
was lower than the appearance of the outer, and had golden doors of
fifty-five cubits altitude, and sixteen in breadth; but before these
doors there was a veil of equal largeness with the doors. It was a
Babylonian curtain, embroidered with blue, and fine linen, and scarlet,
and purple, and of a contexture that was truly wonderful. Nor was this
mixture of colors without its mystical interpretation, but was a kind
of image of the universe; for by the scarlet there seemed to be
enigmatically signified fire, by the fine flax the earth, by the blue
the air, and by the purple the sea; two of them having their colors the
foundation of this resemblance; but the fine flax and the purple have
their own origin for that foundation, the earth producing the one, and
the sea the other. This curtain had also embroidered upon it all that
was mystical in the heavens, excepting that of the [twelve] signs,
representing living creatures.

5. When any persons entered into the temple, its floor received them.
This part of the temple therefore was in height sixty cubits, and its
length the same; whereas its breadth was but twenty cubits: but still
that sixty cubits in length was divided again, and the first part of it
was cut off at forty cubits, and had in it three things that were very
wonderful and famous among all mankind, the candlestick, the table [of
shew-bread], and the altar of incense. Now the seven lamps signified the
seven planets; for so many there were springing out of the candlestick.
Now the twelve loaves that were upon the table signified the circle of
the zodiac and the year; but the altar of incense, by its thirteen kinds
of sweet-smelling spices with which the sea replenished it, signified
that God is the possessor of all things that are both in the
uninhabitable and habitable parts of the earth, and that they are all to
be dedicated to his use. But the inmost part of the temple of all was of
twenty cubits. This was also separated from the outer part by a veil. In
this there was nothing at all. It was inaccessible and inviolable, and
not to be seen by any; and was called the Holy of Holies. Now, about the
sides of the lower part of the temple, there were little houses, with
passages out of one into another; there were a great many of them, and
they were of three stories high; there were also entrances on each side
into them from the gate of the temple. But the superior part of the
temple had no such little houses any further, because the temple was
there narrower, and forty cubits higher, and of a smaller body than the
lower parts of it. Thus we collect that the whole height, including the
sixty cubits from the floor, amounted to a hundred cubits.

6. Now the outward face of the temple in its front wanted nothing that
was likely to surprise either men's minds or their eyes; for it was
covered all over with plates of gold of great weight, and, at the first
rising of the sun, reflected back a very fiery splendor, and made those
who forced themselves to look upon it to turn their eyes away, just as
they would have done at the sun's own rays. But this temple appeared to
strangers, when they were coming to it at a distance, like a mountain
covered with snow; for as to those parts of it that were not gilt, they
were exceeding white. On its top it had spikes with sharp points, to
prevent any pollution of it by birds sitting upon it. Of its stones,
some of them were forty-five cubits in length, five in height, and six
in breadth. Before this temple stood the altar, fifteen cubits high,
and equal both in length and breadth; each of which dimensions was fifty
cubits. The figure it was built in was a square, and it had corners like
horns; and the passage up to it was by an insensible acclivity. It was
formed without any iron tool, nor did any such iron tool so much as
touch it at any time. There was also a wall of partition, about a cubit
in height, made of fine stones, and so as to be grateful to the sight;
this encompassed the holy house and the altar, and kept the people that
were on the outside off from the priests. Moreover, those that had the
gonorrhea and the leprosy were excluded out of the city entirely; women
also, when their courses were upon them, were shut out of the temple;
nor when they were free from that impurity, were they allowed to go
beyond the limit before-mentioned; men also, that were not thoroughly
pure, were prohibited to come into the inner [court of the] temple; nay,
the priests themselves that were not pure were prohibited to come into
it also.

7. Now all those of the stock of the priests that could not minister
by reason of some defect in their bodies, came within the partition,
together with those that had no such imperfection, and had their share
with them by reason of their stock, but still made use of none except
their own private garments; for nobody but he that officiated had on his
sacred garments; but then those priests that were without any blemish
upon them went up to the altar clothed in fine linen. They abstained
chiefly from wine, out of this fear, lest otherwise they should
transgress some rules of their ministration. The high priest did also go
up with them; not always indeed, but on the seventh days and new moons,
and if any festivals belonging to our nation, which we celebrate every
year, happened. When he officiated, he had on a pair of breeches that
reached beneath his privy parts to his thighs, and had on an inner
garment of linen, together with a blue garment, round, without seam,
with fringe work, and reaching to the feet. There were also golden bells
that hung upon the fringes, and pomegranates intermixed among them. The
bells signified thunder, and the pomegranates lightning. But that girdle
that tied the garment to the breast was embroidered with five rows of
various colors, of gold, and purple, and scarlet, as also of fine linen
and blue, with which colors we told you before the veils of the temple
were embroidered also. The like embroidery was upon the ephod; but the
quantity of gold therein was greater. Its figure was that of a stomacher
for the breast. There were upon it two golden buttons like small
shields, which buttoned the ephod to the garment; in these buttons were
enclosed two very large and very excellent sardonyxes, having the names
of the tribes of that nation engraved upon them: on the other part there
hung twelve stones, three in a row one way, and four in the other; a
sardius, a topaz, and an emerald; a carbuncle, a jasper, and a sapphire;
an agate, an amethyst, and a ligure; an onyx, a beryl, and a chrysolite;
upon every one of which was again engraved one of the forementioned
names of the tribes. A mitre also of fine linen encompassed his head,
which was tied by a blue ribbon, about which there was another golden
crown, in which was engraven the sacred name [of God]: it consists of
four vowels. However, the high priest did not wear these garments at
other times, but a more plain habit; he only did it when he went into
the most sacred part of the temple, which he did but once in a year,
on that day when our custom is for all of us to keep a fast to God. And
thus much concerning the city and the temple; but for the customs and
laws hereto relating, we shall speak more accurately another time; for
there remain a great many things thereto relating which have not been
here touched upon.

8. Now as to the tower of Antonia, it was situated at the corner of two
cloisters of the court of the temple; of that on the west, and that on
the north; it was erected upon a rock of fifty cubits in height, and
was on a great precipice; it was the work of king Herod, wherein he
demonstrated his natural magnanimity. In the first place, the
rock itself was covered over with smooth pieces of stone, from its
foundation, both for ornament, and that any one who would either try to
get up or to go down it might not be able to hold his feet upon it. Next
to this, and before you come to the edifice of the tower itself, there
was a wall three cubits high; but within that wall all the space of the
tower of Antonia itself was built upon, to the height of forty cubits.
The inward parts had the largeness and form of a palace, it being parted
into all kinds of rooms and other conveniences, such as courts, and
places for bathing, and broad spaces for camps; insomuch that, by having
all conveniences that cities wanted, it might seem to be composed of
several cities, but by its magnificence it seemed a palace. And as the
entire structure resembled that of a tower, it contained also four other
distinct towers at its four corners; whereof the others were but fifty
cubits high; whereas that which lay upon the southeast corner was
seventy cubits high, that from thence the whole temple might be viewed;
but on the corner where it joined to the two cloisters of the temple,
it had passages down to them both, through which the guard [for there
always lay in this tower a Roman legion] went several ways among the
cloisters, with their arms, on the Jewish festivals, in order to watch
the people, that they might not there attempt to make any innovations;
for the temple was a fortress that guarded the city, as was the tower
of Antonia a guard to the temple; and in that tower were the guards
of those three 14. There was also a peculiar fortress belonging to the
upper city, which was Herod's palace; but for the hill Bezetha, it was
divided from the tower Antonia, as we have already told you; and as that
hill on which the tower of Antonia stood was the highest of these three,
so did it adjoin to the new city, and was the only place that hindered
the sight of the temple on the north. And this shall suffice at present
to have spoken about the city and the walls about it, because I have
proposed to myself to make a more accurate description of it elsewhere.






CHAPTER 6.


     Concerning The Tyrants Simon And John. How Also As Titus Was
     Going Round The Wall Of This City Nicanor Was Wounded By A
     Dart; Which Accident Provoked Titus To Press On The Siege.

1. Now the warlike men that were in the city, and the multitude of the
seditious that were with Simon, were ten thousand, besides the Idumeans.
Those ten thousand had fifty commanders, over whom this Simon was
supreme. The Idumeans that paid him homage were five thousand, and had
eight commanders, among whom those of greatest fame were Jacob the son
of Sosas, and Simon the son of Cathlas. Jotre, who had seized upon the
temple, had six thousand armed men under twenty commanders; the zealots
also that had come over to him, and left off their opposition, were
two thousand four hundred, and had the same commander that they had
formerly, Eleazar, together with Simon the son of Arinus. Now, while
these factions fought one against another, the people were their prey
on both sides, as we have said already; and that part of the people who
would not join with them in their wicked practices were plundered by
both factions. Simon held the upper city, and the great wall as far as
Cedron, and as much of the old wall as bent from Siloam to the east,
and which went down to the palace of Monobazus, who was king of the
Adiabeni, beyond Euphrates; he also held that fountain, and the Acra,
which was no other than the lower city; he also held all that reached to
the palace of queen Helena, the mother of Monobazus. But John held the
temple, and the parts thereto adjoining, for a great way, as also Ophla,
and the valley called "the Valley of Cedron;" and when the parts that
were interposed between their possessions were burnt by them, they left
a space wherein they might fight with each other; for this internal
sedition did not cease even when the Romans were encamped near their
very wall. But although they had grown wiser at the first onset the
Romans made upon them, this lasted but a while; for they returned to
their former madness, and separated one from another, and fought it out,
and did everything that the besiegers could desire them to do; for they
never suffered any thing that was worse from the Romans than they made
each other suffer; nor was there any misery endured by the city after
these men's actions that could be esteemed new. But it was most of all
unhappy before it was overthrown, while those that took it did it a
greater kindness for I venture to affirm that the sedition destroyed the
city, and the Romans destroyed the sedition, which it was a much harder
thing to do than to destroy the walls; so that we may justly ascribe our
misfortunes to our own people, and the just vengeance taken on them to
the Romans; as to which matter let every one determine by the actions on
both sides.

2. Now when affairs within the city were in this posture, Titus went
round the city on the outside with some chosen horsemen, and looked
about for a proper place where he might make an impression upon the
walls; but as he was in doubt where he could possibly make an attack on
any side, [for the place was no way accessible where the valleys were,
and on the other side the first wall appeared too strong to be shaken by
the engines,] he thereupon thought it best to make his assault upon
the monument of John the high priest; for there it was that the first
fortification was lower, and the second was not joined to it, the
builders neglecting to build strong where the new city was not much
inhabited; here also was an easy passage to the third wall, through
which he thought to take the upper city, and, through the tower of
Antonia, the temple itself But at this time, as he was going round about
the city, one of his friends, whose name was Nicanor, was wounded with a
dart on his left shoulder, as he approached, together with Josephus, too
near the wall, and attempted to discourse to those that were upon the
wall, about terms of peace; for he was a person known by them. On this
account it was that Caesar, as soon as he knew their vehemence, that
they would not hear even such as approached them to persuade them to
what tended to their own preservation, was provoked to press on the
siege. He also at the same time gave his soldiers leave to set the
suburbs on fire, and ordered that they should bring timber together, and
raise banks against the city; and when he had parted his army into three
parts, in order to set about those works, he placed those that shot
darts and the archers in the midst of the banks that were then raising;
before whom he placed those engines that threw javelins, and darts, and
stones, that he might prevent the enemy from sallying out upon their
works, and might hinder those that were upon the wall from being able
to obstruct them. So the trees were now cut down immediately, and the
suburbs left naked. But now while the timber was carrying to raise the
banks, and the whole army was earnestly engaged in their works, the Jews
were not, however, quiet; and it happened that the people of Jerusalem,
who had been hitherto plundered and murdered, were now of good courage,
and supposed they should have a breathing time, while the others were
very busy in opposing their enemies without the city, and that they
should now be avenged on those that had been the authors of their
miseries, in case the Romans did but get the victory.

3. However, John staid behind, out of his fear of Simon, even while his
own men were earnest in making a sally upon their enemies without. Yet
did not Simon lie still, for he lay near the place of the siege; he
brought his engines of war, and disposed of them at due distances upon
the wall, both those which they took from Cestius formerly, and those
which they got when they seized the garrison that lay in the tower
Antonia. But though they had these engines in their possession, they had
so little skill in using them, that they were in great measure useless
to them; but a few there were who had been taught by deserters how to
use them, which they did use, though after an awkward manner. So they
cast stones and arrows at those that were making the banks; they also
ran out upon them by companies, and fought with them. Now those that
were at work covered themselves with hurdles spread over their banks,
and their engines were opposed to them when they made their excursions.
The engines, that all the legions had ready prepared for them, were
admirably contrived; but still more extraordinary ones belonged to the
tenth legion: those that threw darts and those that threw stones were
more forcible and larger than the rest, by which they not only repelled
the excursions of the Jews, but drove those away that were upon the
walls also. Now the stones that were cast were of the weight of a
talent, and were carried two furlongs and further. The blow they gave
was no way to be sustained, not only by those that stood first in the
way, but by those that were beyond them for a great space. As for the
Jews, they at first watched the coming of the stone, for it was of a
white color, and could therefore not only be perceived by the great
noise it made, but could be seen also before it came by its brightness;
accordingly the watchmen that sat upon the towers gave them notice when
the engine was let go, and the stone came from it, and cried out aloud,
in their own country language, The Stone Cometh 15 so those that were in
its way stood off, and threw themselves down upon the ground; by which
means, and by their thus guarding themselves, the stone fell down
and did them no harm. But the Romans contrived how to prevent that by
blacking the stone, who then could aim at them with success, when the
stone was not discerned beforehand, as it had been till then; and so
they destroyed many of them at one blow. Yet did not the Jews, under all
this distress, permit the Romans to raise their banks in quiet; but they
shrewdly and boldly exerted themselves, and repelled them both by night
and by day.

4. And now, upon the finishing the Roman works, the workmen measured
the distance there was from the wall, and this by lead and a line, which
they threw to it from their banks; for they could not measure it any
otherwise, because the Jews would shoot at them, if they came to measure
it themselves; and when they found that the engines could reach the
wall, they brought them thither. Then did Titus set his engines at
proper distances, so much nearer to the wall, that the Jews might not
be able to repel them, and gave orders they should go to work; and when
thereupon a prodigious noise echoed round about from three places, and
that on the sudden there was a great noise made by the citizens that
were within the city, and no less a terror fell upon the seditious
themselves; whereupon both sorts, seeing the common danger they were in,
contrived to make a like defense. So those of different factions cried
out one to another, that they acted entirely as in concert with their
enemies; whereas they ought however, notwithstanding God did not grant
them a lasting concord, in their present circumstances, to lay aside
their enmities one against another, and to unite together against the
Romans. Accordingly, Simon gave those that came from the temple leave,
by proclamation, to go upon the wall; John also himself, though he could
not believe Simon was in earnest, gave them the same leave. So on both
sides they laid aside their hatred and their peculiar quarrels, and
formed themselves into one body; they then ran round the walls, and
having a vast number of torches with them, they threw them at the
machines, and shot darts perpetually upon those that impelled those
engines which battered the wall; nay, the bolder sort leaped out by
troops upon the hurdles that covered the machines, and pulled them to
pieces, and fell upon those that belonged to them, and beat them, not
so much by any skill they had, as principally by the boldness of their
attacks. However, Titus himself still sent assistance to those that were
the hardest set, and placed both horsemen and archers on the several
sides of the engines, and thereby beat off those that brought the fire
to them; he also thereby repelled those that shot stones or darts from
the towers, and then set the engines to work in good earnest; yet did
not the wall yield to these blows, excepting where the battering ram of
the fifteenth legion moved the corner of a tower, while the wall itself
continued unhurt; for the wall was not presently in the same danger with
the tower, which was extant far above it; nor could the fall of that
part of the tower easily break down any part of the wall itself together
with it.

5. And now the Jews intermitted their sallies for a while; but when they
observed the Romans dispersed all abroad at their works, and in their
several camps, [for they thought the Jews had retired out of weariness
and fear,] they all at once made a sally at the tower Hippicus, through
an obscure gate, and at the same time brought fire to burn the works,
and went boldly up to the Romans, and to their very fortifications
themselves, where, at the cry they made, those that were near them came
presently to their assistance, and those farther off came running after
them; and here the boldness of the Jews was too hard for the good order
of the Romans; and as they beat those whom they first fell upon, so they
pressed upon those that were now gotten together. So this fight about
the machines was very hot, while the one side tried hard to set them
on fire, and the other side to prevent it; on both sides there was a
confused cry made, and many of those in the forefront of the battle
were slain. However, the Jews were now too hard for the Romans, by the
furious assaults they made like madmen; and the fire caught hold of the
works, and both all those works, and the engines themselves, had been in
danger of being burnt, had not many of these select soldiers that came
from Alexandria opposed themselves to prevent it, and had they not
behaved themselves with greater courage than they themselves supposed
they could have done; for they outdid those in this fight that had
greater reputation than themselves before. This was the state of things
till Caesar took the stoutest of his horsemen, and attacked the enemy,
while he himself slew twelve of those that were in the forefront of the
Jews; which death of these men, when the rest of the multitude saw, they
gave way, and he pursued them, and drove them all into the city, and
saved the works from the fire. Now it happened at this fight that a
certain Jew was taken alive, who, by Titus's order, was crucified before
the wall, to see whether the rest of them would be affrighted, and
abate of their obstinacy. But after the Jews were retired, John, who was
commander of the Idumeans, and was talking to a certain soldier of his
acquaintance before the wall, was wounded by a dart shot at him by an
Arabian, and died immediately, leaving the greatest lamentation to the
Jews, and sorrow to the seditious. For he was a man of great eminence,
both for his actions and his conduct also.






CHAPTER 7.


     How One Of The Towers Erected By The Romans Fell Down Of Its
     Own Accord; And How The Romans After Great Slaughter Had
     Been Made Got Possession Of The First Wall. How Also Titus
     Made His Assaults Upon The Second Wall; As Also Concerning
     Longinus The Roman, And Castor The Jew.

1. Now, on the next night, a surprising disturbance fell upon the
Romans; for whereas Titus had given orders for the erection of three
towers of fifty cubits high, that by setting men upon them at every
bank, he might from thence drive those away who were upon the wall, it
so happened that one of these towers fell down about midnight; and as
its fall made a very great noise, fear fell upon the army, and they,
supposing that the enemy was coming to attack them, ran all to their
arms. Whereupon a disturbance and a tumult arose among the legions,
and as nobody could tell what had happened, they went on after a
disconsolate manner; and seeing no enemy appear, they were afraid one of
another, and every one demanded of his neighbor the watchword with great
earnestness, as though the Jews had invaded their camp. And now were
they like people under a panic fear, till Titus was informed of what
had happened, and gave orders that all should be acquainted with it;
and then, though with some difficulty, they got clear of the disturbance
they had been under.

2. Now these towers were very troublesome to the Jews, who otherwise
opposed the Romans very courageously; for they shot at them out of their
lighter engines from those towers, as they did also by those that threw
darts, and the archers, and those that flung stones. For neither could
the Jews reach those that were over them, by reason of their height; and
it was not practicable to take them, nor to overturn them, they were so
heavy, nor to set them on fire, because they were covered with plates of
iron. So they retired out of the reach of the darts, and did no longer
endeavor to hinder the impression of their rams, which, by continually
beating upon the wall, did gradually prevail against it; so that
the wall already gave way to the Nico, for by that name did the Jews
themselves call the greatest of their engines, because it conquered all
things. And now they were for a long while grown weary of fighting,
and of keeping guards, and were retired to lodge in the night time at a
distance from the wall. It was on other accounts also thought by them
to be superfluous to guard the wall, there being besides that two other
fortifications still remaining, and they being slothful, and their
counsels having been ill concerted on all occasions; so a great many
grew lazy and retired. Then the Romans mounted the breach, where
Nico had made one, and all the Jews left the guarding that wall, and
retreated to the second wall; so those that had gotten over that wall
opened the gates, and received all the army within it. And thus did the
Romans get possession of this first wall, on the fifteenth day of the
siege, which was the seventh day of the month Artemisius, [Jyar,] when
they demolished a great part of it, as well as they did of the northern
parts of the city, which had been demolished also by Cestius formerly.

3. And now Titus pitched his camp within the city, at that place which
was called "the Camp of the Assyrians," having seized upon all that
lay as far as Cedron, but took care to be out of the reach of the Jews'
darts. He then presently began his attacks, upon which the Jews divided
themselves into several bodies, and courageously defended that wall;
while John and his faction did it from the tower of Antonia, and from
the northern cloister of the temple, and fought the Romans before the
monuments of king Alexander; and Sireoh's army also took for their share
the spot of ground that was near John's monument, and fortified it as
far as to that gate where water was brought in to the tower Hippicus.
However, the Jews made violent sallies, and that frequently also, and in
bodies together out of the gates, and there fought the Romans; and when
they were pursued all together to the wall, they were beaten in those
fights, as wanting the skill of the Romans. But when they fought them
from the walls, they were too hard for them; the Romans being encouraged
by their power, joined to their skill, as were the Jews by their
boldness, which was nourished by the fear they were in, and that
hardiness which is natural to our nation under calamities; they were
also encouraged still by the hope of deliverance, as were the Romans by
their hopes of subduing them in a little time. Nor did either side grow
weary; but attacks and rightings upon the wall, and perpetual sallies
out in bodies, were there all the day long; nor were there any sort of
warlike engagements that were not then put in use. And the night itself
had much ado to part them, when they began to fight in the morning; nay,
the night itself was passed without sleep on both sides, and was more
uneasy than the day to them, while the one was afraid lest the wall
should be taken, and the other lest the Jews should make sallies upon
their camps; both sides also lay in their armor during the night time,
and thereby were ready at the first appearance of light to go to the
battle. Now among the Jews the ambition was who should undergo the first
dangers, and thereby gratify their commanders. Above all, they had a
great veneration and dread of Simon; and to that degree was he regarded
by every one of those that were under him, that at his command they were
very ready to kill themselves with their own hands. What made the Romans
so courageous was their usual custom of conquering and disuse of being
defeated, their constant wars, and perpetual warlike exercises, and
the grandeur of their dominion; and what was now their chief
encouragement--Titus who was present every where with them all; for
it appeared a terrible thing to grow weary while Caesar was there,
and fought bravely as well as they did, and was himself at once an
eye-witness of such as behaved themselves valiantly, and he who was to
reward them also. It was, besides, esteemed an advantage at present
to have any one's valor known by Caesar; on which account many of them
appeared to have more alacrity than strength to answer it. And now, as
the Jews were about this time standing in array before the wall, and
that in a strong body, and while both parties were throwing their darts
at each other, Longinus, one of the equestrian order, leaped out of the
army of the Romans, and leaped into the very midst of the army of the
Jews; and as they dispersed themselves upon the attack, he slew two of
their men of the greatest courage; one of them he struck in his mouth as
he was coming to meet him, the other was slain by him by that very dart
which he drew out of the body of the other, with which he ran this man
through his side as he was running away from him; and when he had done
this, he first of all ran out of the midst of his enemies to his own
side. So this man signalized himself for his valor, and many there were
who were ambitious of gaining the like reputation. And now the Jews were
unconcerned at what they suffered themselves from the Romans, and were
only solicitous about what mischief they could do them; and death itself
seemed a small matter to them, if at the same time they could but kill
any one of their enemies. But Titus took care to secure his own soldiers
from harm, as well as to have them overcome their enemies. He also said
that inconsiderate violence was madness, and that this alone was the
true courage that was joined with good conduct. He therefore commanded
his men to take care, when they fought their enemies, that they received
no harm from them at the same time, and thereby show themselves to be
truly valiant men.

4. And now Titus brought one of his engines to the middle tower of the
north part of the wall, in which a certain crafty Jew, whose name was
Castor, lay in ambush, with ten others like himself, the rest being fled
away by reason of the archers. These men lay still for a while, as in
great fear, under their breastplates; but when the tower was shaken,
they arose, and Castor did then stretch out his hand, as a petitioner,
and called for Caesar, and by his voice moved his compassion, and begged
of him to have mercy upon them; and Titus, in the innocency of his
heart, believing him to be in earnest, and hoping that the Jews did now
repent, stopped the working of the battering ram, and forbade them to
shoot at the petitioners, and bid Castor say what he had a mind to say
to him. He said that he would come down, if he would give him his right
hand for his security. To which Titus replied, that he was well pleased
with such his agreeable conduct, and would be well pleased if all
the Jews would be of his mind, and that he was ready to give the like
security to the city. Now five of the ten dissembled with him, and
pretended to beg for mercy, while the rest cried out aloud that they
would never be slaves to the Romans, while it was in their power to die
in a state of freedom. Now while these men were quarrelling for a long
while, the attack was delayed; Castor also sent to Simon, and told him
that they might take some time for consultation about what was to be
done, because he would elude the power of the Romans for a considerable
time. And at the same time that he sent thus to him, he appeared openly
to exhort those that were obstinate to accept of Titus's hand for their
security; but they seemed very angry at it, and brandished their naked
swords upon the breast-works, and struck themselves upon their breast,
and fell down as if they had been slain. Hereupon Titus, and those with
him, were amazed at the courage of the men; and as they were not able
to see exactly what was done, they admired at their great fortitude,
and pitied their calamity. During this interval, a certain person shot
a dart at Castor, and wounded him in his nose; whereupon he presently
pulled out the dart, and showed it to Titus, and complained that this
was unfair treatment; so Caesar reproved him that shot the dart, and
sent Josephus, who then stood by him, to give his right hand to Castor.
But Josephus said that he would not go to him, because these pretended
petitioners meant nothing that was good; he also restrained those
friends of his who were zealous to go to him. But still there was one
Eneas, a deserter, who said he would go to him. Castor also called to
them, that somebody should come and receive the money which he had with
him; this made Eneas the more earnestly to run to him with his bosom
open. Then did Castor take up a great stone, and threw it at him, which
missed him, because he guarded himself against it; but still it wounded
another soldier that was coming to him. When Caesar understood that this
was a delusion, he perceived that mercy in war is a pernicious thing,
because such cunning tricks have less place under the exercise of
greater severity. So he caused the engine to work more strongly than
before, on account of his anger at the deceit put upon him. But Castor
and his companions set the tower on fire when it began to give way, and
leaped through the flame into a hidden vault that was under it, which
made the Romans further suppose that they were men of great courage, as
having cast themselves into the fire.






CHAPTER 8.


     How The Romans Took The Second Wall Twice, And Got All Ready
     For Taking The Third Wall.

1. Now Caesar took this wall there on the fifth day after he had taken
the first; and when the Jews had fled from him, he entered into it with
a thousand armed men, and those of his choice troops, and this at a
place where were the merchants of wool, the braziers, and the market
for cloth, and where the narrow streets led obliquely to the wall.
Wherefore, if Titus had either demolished a larger part of the wall
immediately, or had come in, and, according to the law of war, had laid
waste what was left, his victory would not, I suppose, have been mixed
with any loss to himself. But now, out of the hope he had that he should
make the Jews ashamed of their obstinacy, by not being willing, when he
was able, to afflict them more than he needed to do, he did not widen
the breach of the wall, in order to make a safer retreat upon occasion;
for he did not think they would lay snares for him that did them such a
kindness. When therefore he came in, he did not permit his soldiers to
kill any of those they caught, nor to set fire to their houses neither;
nay, he gave leave to the seditious, if they had a mind, to fight
without any harm to the people, and promised to restore the people's
effects to them; for he was very desirous to preserve the city for his
own sake, and the temple for the sake of the city. As to the people, he
had them of a long time ready to comply with his proposals; but as to
the fighting men, this humanity of his seemed a mark of his weakness,
and they imagined that he made these proposals because he was not able
to take the rest of the city. They also threatened death to the people,
if they should any one of them say a word about a surrender. They
moreover cut the throats of such as talked of a peace, and then attacked
those Romans that were come within the wall. Some of them they met in
the narrow streets, and some they fought against from their houses,
while they made a sudden sally out at the upper gates, and assaulted
such Romans as were beyond the wall, till those that guarded the wall
were so affrighted, that they leaped down from their towers, and retired
to their several camps: upon which a great noise was made by the Romans
that were within, because they were encompassed round on every side by
their enemies; as also by them that were without, because they were in
fear for those that were left in the city. Thus did the Jews grow more
numerous perpetually, and had great advantages over the Romans, by their
full knowledge of those narrow lanes; and they wounded a great many
of them, and fell upon them, and drove them out of the city. Now these
Romans were at present forced to make the best resistance they could;
for they were not able, in great numbers, to get out at the breach in
the wall, it was so narrow. It is also probable that all those that
were gotten within had been cut to pieces, if Titus had not sent them
succors; for he ordered the archers to stand at the upper ends of these
narrow lanes, and he stood himself where was the greatest multitude of
his enemies, and with his darts he put a stop to them; as with him
did Domitius Sabinus also, a valiant man, and one that in this battle
appeared so to be. Thus did Caesar continue to shoot darts at the Jews
continually, and to hinder them from coming upon his men, and this until
all his soldiers had retreated out of the city.

2. And thus were the Romans driven out, after they had possessed
themselves of the second wall. Whereupon the fighting men that were
in the city were lifted up in their minds, and were elevated upon this
their good success, and began to think that the Romans would never
venture to come into the city any more; and that if they kept within it
themselves, they should not be any more conquered. For God had blinded
their minds for the transgressions they had been guilty of, nor could
they see how much greater forces the Romans had than those that were now
expelled, no more than they could discern how a famine was creeping upon
them; for hitherto they had fed themselves out of the public miseries,
and drank the blood of the city. But now poverty had for a long time
seized upon the better part, and a great many had died already for want
of necessaries; although the seditious indeed supposed the destruction
of the people to be an easement to themselves; for they desired that
none others might be preserved but such as were against a peace with the
Romans, and were resolved to live in opposition to them, and they were
pleased when the multitude of those of a contrary opinion were consumed,
as being then freed from a heavy burden. And this was their disposition
of mind with regard to those that were within the city, while they
covered themselves with their armor, and prevented the Romans, when they
were trying to get into the city again, and made a wall of their own
bodies over against that part of the wall that was cast down. Thus did
they valiantly defend themselves for three days; but on the fourth day
they could not support themselves against the vehement assaults of Titus
but were compelled by force to fly whither they had fled before; so
he quietly possessed himself again of that wall, and demolished it
entirely. And when he had put a garrison into the towers that were on
the south parts of the city, he contrived how he might assault the third
wall.






CHAPTER 9.


     Titus When The Jews Were Not At All Mollified By His Leaving
     Off The Siege For A While, Set Himself Again To Prosecute
     The Same; But Soon Sent Josephus To Discourse With His Own
     Countrymen About Peace.

1. A Resolution was now taken by Titus to relax the siege for a little
while, and to afford the seditious an interval for consideration, and to
see whether the demolishing of their second wall would not make them
a little more compliant, or whether they were not somewhat afraid of
a famine, because the spoils they had gotten by rapine would not be
sufficient for them long; so he made use of this relaxation in order to
compass his own designs. Accordingly, as the usual appointed time when
he must distribute subsistence money to the soldiers was now come, he
gave orders that the commanders should put the army into battle-array,
in the face of the enemy, and then give every one of the soldiers their
pay. So the soldiers, according to custom, opened the cases wherein
their arms before lay covered, and marched with their breastplates on,
as did the horsemen lead their horses in their fine trappings. Then did
the places that were before the city shine very splendidly for a great
way; nor was there any thing so grateful to Titus's own men, or so
terrible to the enemy, as that sight. For the whole old wall, and the
north side of the temple, were full of spectators, and one might see
the houses full of such as looked at them; nor was there any part of the
city which was not covered over with their multitudes; nay, a very great
consternation seized upon the hardiest of the Jews themselves, when they
saw all the army in the same place, together with the fineness of their
arms, and the good order of their men. And I cannot but think that
the seditious would have changed their minds at that sight, unless the
crimes they had committed against the people had been so horrid, that
they despaired of forgiveness from the Romans; but as they believed
death with torments must be their punishment, if they did not go on in
the defense of the city, they thought it much better to die in war. Fate
also prevailed so far over them, that the innocent were to perish with
the guilty, and the city was to be destroyed with the seditious that
were in it.

2. Thus did the Romans spend four days in bringing this
subsistence-money to the several legions. But on the fifth day, when
no signs of peace appeared to come from the Jews, Titus divided his
legions, and began to raise banks, both at the tower of Antonia and at
John's monument. Now his designs were to take the upper city at that
monument, and the temple at the tower of Antonia; for if the temple were
not taken, it would be dangerous to keep the city itself; so at each of
these parts he raised him banks, each legion raising one. As for those
that wrought at John's monument, the Idumeans, and those that were in
arms with Simon, made sallies upon them, and put some stop to them;
while John's party, and the multitude of zealots with them, did the like
to those that were before the tower of Antonia. These Jews were now too
hard for the Romans, not only in direct fighting, because they stood
upon the higher ground, but because they had now learned to use their
own engines; for their continual use of them one day after another did
by degrees improve their skill about them; for of one sort of engines
for darts they had three hundred, and forty for stones; by the means of
which they made it more tedious for the Romans to raise their banks. But
then Titus, knowing that the city would be either saved or destroyed for
himself, did not only proceed earnestly in the siege, but did not omit
to have the Jews exhorted to repentance; so he mixed good counsel
with his works for the siege. And being sensible that exhortations are
frequently more effectual than arms, he persuaded them to surrender the
city, now in a manner already taken, and thereby to save themselves, and
sent Josephus to speak to them in their own language; for he imagined
they might yield to the persuasion of a countryman of their own.

3. So Josephus went round about the wall, and tried to find a place that
was out of the reach of their darts, and yet within their hearing,
and besought them, in many words, to spare themselves, to spare their
country and their temple, and not to be more obdurate in these cases
than foreigners themselves; for that the Romans, who had no relation
to those things, had a reverence for their sacred rites and places,
although they belonged to their enemies, and had till now kept their
hands off from meddling with them; while such as were brought up under
them, and, if they be preserved, will be the only people that will reap
the benefit of them, hurry on to have them destroyed. That certainly
they have seen their strongest walls demolished, and that the wall still
remaining was weaker than those that were already taken. That they must
know the Roman power was invincible, and that they had been used to
serve them; for, that in case it be allowed a right thing to fight for
liberty, that ought to have been done at first; but for them that have
once fallen under the power of the Romans, and have now submitted
to them for so many long years, to pretend to shake off that yoke
afterward, was the work of such as had a mind to die miserably, not of
such as were lovers of liberty. Besides, men may well enough grudge at
the dishonor of owning ignoble masters over them, but ought not to do so
to those who have all things under their command; for what part of the
world is there that hath escaped the Romans, unless it be such as are
of no use for violent heat, or for violent cold? And evident it is that
fortune is on all hands gone over to them; and that God, when he had
gone round the nations with this dominion, is now settled in Italy.
That, moreover, it is a strong and fixed law, even among brute beasts,
as well as among men, to yield to those that are too strong for them;
and to suffer those to have the dominion who are too hard for the rest
in war; for which reason it was that their forefathers, who were far
superior to them, both in their souls and bodies, and other advantages,
did yet submit to the Romans, which they would not have suffered, had
they not known that God was with them. As for themselves, what can they
depend on in this their opposition, when the greatest part of their city
is already taken? and when those that are within it are under greater
miseries than if they were taken, although their walls be still
standing? For that the Romans are not unacquainted with that famine
which is in the city, whereby the people are already consumed, and the
fighting men will in a little time be so too; for although the Romans
should leave off the siege, and not fall upon the city with their swords
in their hands, yet was there an insuperable war that beset them within,
and was augmented every hour, unless they were able to wage war with
famine, and fight against it, or could alone conquer their natural
appetites. He added this further, how right a thing it was to change
their conduct before their calamities were become incurable, and to have
recourse to such advice as might preserve them, while opportunity was
offered them for so doing; for that the Romans would not be mindful
of their past actions to their disadvantage, unless they persevered in
their insolent behavior to the end; because they were naturally mild in
their conquests, and preferred what was profitable, before what their
passions dictated to them; which profit of theirs lay not in leaving the
city empty of inhabitants, nor the country a desert; on which account
Caesar did now offer them his right hand for their security. Whereas,
if he took the city by force, he would not save any of them, and
this especially, if they rejected his offers in these their utmost
distresses; for the walls that were already taken could not but assure
them that the third wall would quickly be taken also. And though their
fortifications should prove too strong for the Romans to break through
them, yet would the famine fight for the Romans against them.

4. While Josephus was making this exhortation to the Jews, many of them
jested upon him from the wall, and many reproached him; nay, some threw
their darts at him: but when he could not himself persuade them by such
open good advice, he betook himself to the histories belonging to their
own nation, and cried out aloud, "O miserable creatures! are you so
unmindful of those that used to assist you, that you will fight by your
weapons and by your hands against the Romans? When did we ever conquer
any other nation by such means? and when was it that God, who is the
Creator of the Jewish people, did not avenge them when they had been
injured? Will not you turn again, and look back, and consider whence it
is that you fight with such violence, and how great a Supporter you have
profanely abused? Will not you recall to mind the prodigious things done
for your forefathers and this holy place, and how great enemies of yours
were by him subdued under you? I even tremble myself in declaring the
works of God before your ears, that are unworthy to hear them; however,
hearken to me, that you may be informed how you fight not only against
the Romans, but against God himself. In old times there was one Necao,
king of Egypt, who was also called Pharaoh; he came with a prodigious
army of soldiers, and seized queen Sarah, the mother of our nation.
What did Abraham our progenitor then do? Did he defend himself from
this injurious person by war, although he had three hundred and eighteen
captains under him, and an immense army under each of them? Indeed he
deemed them to be no number at all without God's assistance, and only
spread out his hands towards this holy place, 16 which you have now
polluted, and reckoned upon him as upon his invincible supporter,
instead of his own army. Was not our queen sent back, without any
defilement, to her husband, the very next evening?--while the king of
Egypt fled away, adoring this place which you have defiled by shedding
thereon the blood of your own countrymen; and he also trembled at those
visions which he saw in the night season, and bestowed both silver and
gold on the Hebrews, as on a people beloved by God. Shall I say nothing,
or shall I mention the removal of our fathers into Egypt, who, when they
were used tyrannically, and were fallen under the power of foreign kings
for four hundred years together, and might have defended themselves by
war and by fighting, did yet do nothing but commit themselves to God!
Who is there that does not know that Egypt was overrun with all sorts of
wild beasts, and consumed by all sorts of distempers? how their land
did not bring forth its fruit? how the Nile failed of water? how the ten
plagues of Egypt followed one upon another? and how by those means our
fathers were sent away under a guard, without any bloodshed, and
without running any dangers, because God conducted them as his peculiar
servants? Moreover, did not Palestine groan 17 under the ravage the
Assyrians made, when they carried away our sacred ark? as did their idol
Dagon, and as also did that entire nation of those that carried it away,
how they were smitten with a loathsome distemper in the secret parts of
their bodies, when their very bowels came down together with what they
had eaten, till those hands that stole it away were obliged to bring it
back again, and that with the sound of cymbals and timbrels, and other
oblations, in order to appease the anger of God for their violation of
his holy ark. It was God who then became our General, and accomplished
these great things for our fathers, and this because they did not meddle
with war and fighting, but committed it to him to judge about their
affairs. When Sennacherib, king of Assyria, brought along with him all
Asia, and encompassed this city round with his army, did he fall by the
hands of men? were not those hands lifted up to God in prayers, without
meddling with their arms, when an angel of God destroyed that prodigious
army in one night? when the Assyrian king, as he rose the next day,
found a hundred fourscore and five thousand dead bodies, and when he,
with the remainder of his army, fled away from the Hebrews, though they
were unarmed, and did not pursue them. You are also acquainted with the
slavery we were under at Babylon, where the people were captives for
seventy years; yet were they not delivered into freedom again before
God made Cyrus his gracious instrument in bringing it about; accordingly
they were set free by him, and did again restore the worship of their
Deliverer at his temple. And, to speak in general, we can produce no
example wherein our fathers got any success by war, or failed of success
when without war they committed themselves to God. When they staid at
home, they conquered, as pleased their Judge; but when they went out
to fight, they were always disappointed: for example, when the king of
Babylon besieged this very city, and our king Zedekiah fought against
him, contrary to what predictions were made to him by Jeremiah the
prophet, he was at once taken prisoner, and saw the city and the temple
demolished. Yet how much greater was the moderation of that king, than
is that of your present governors, and that of the people then under
him, than is that of you at this time! for when Jeremiah cried out
aloud, how very angry God was at them, because of their transgressions,
and told them they should be taken prisoners, unless they would
surrender up their city, neither did the king nor the people put him to
death; but for you, [to pass over what you have done within the city,
which I am not able to describe as your wickedness deserves,] you abuse
me, and throw darts at me, who only exhort you to save yourselves, as
being provoked when you are put in mind of your sins, and cannot bear
the very mention of those crimes which you every day perpetrate. For
another example, when Antiochus, who was called Epiphanes, lay before
this city, and had been guilty of many indignities against God, and our
forefathers met him in arms, they then were slain in the battle, this
city was plundered by our enemies, and our sanctuary made desolate for
three years and six months. And what need I bring any more examples?
Indeed what can it be that hath stirred up an army of the Romans against
our nation? Is it not the impiety of the inhabitants? Whence did our
servitude commence? Was it not derived from the seditions that were
among our forefathers, when the madness of Aristobulus and Hyrcanus, and
our mutual quarrels, brought Pompey upon this city, and when God reduced
those under subjection to the Romans who were unworthy of the liberty
they had enjoyed? After a siege, therefore, of three months, they were
forced to surrender themselves, although they had not been guilty of
such offenses, with regard to our sanctuary and our laws, as you have;
and this while they had much greater advantages to go to war than you
have. Do not we know what end Antigonus, the son of Aristobulus, came
to, under whose reign God provided that this city should be taken again
upon account of the people's offenses? When Herod, the son of Antipater,
brought upon us Sosius, and Sosius brought upon us the Roman army, they
were then encompassed and besieged for six months, till, as a punishment
for their sins, they were taken, and the city was plundered by the
enemy. Thus it appears that arms were never given to our nation, but
that we are always given up to be fought against, and to be taken; for
I suppose that such as inhabit this holy place ought to commit the
disposal of all things to God, and then only to disregard the assistance
of men when they resign themselves up to their Arbitrator, who is above.
As for you, what have you done of those things that are recommended by
our legislator? and what have you not done of those things that he hath
condemned? How much more impious are you than those who were so quickly
taken! You have not avoided so much as those sins that are usually
done in secret; I mean thefts, and treacherous plots against men, and
adulteries. You are quarrelling about rapines and murders, and invent
strange ways of wickedness. Nay, the temple itself is become the
receptacle of all, and this Divine place is polluted by the hands of
those of our own country; which place hath yet been reverenced by the
Romans when it was at a distance from them, when they have suffered many
of their own customs to give place to our law. And, after all this, do
you expect Him whom you have so impiously abused to be your supporter?
To be sure then you have a right to be petitioners, and to call upon Him
to assist you, so pure are your hands! Did your king [Hezekiah] lift
up such hands in prayer to God against the king of Assyria, when he
destroyed that great army in one night? And do the Romans commit such
wickedness as did the king of Assyria, that you may have reason to hope
for the like vengeance upon them? Did not that king accept of money from
our king on this condition, that he should not destroy the city, and
yet, contrary to the oath he had taken, he came down to burn the temple?
while the Romans do demand no more than that accustomed tribute which
our fathers paid to their fathers; and if they may but once obtain that,
they neither aim to destroy this city, nor to touch this sanctuary; nay,
they will grant you besides, that your posterity shall be free, and your
possessions secured to you, and will preserve our holy laws inviolate
to you. And it is plain madness to expect that God should appear as well
disposed towards the wicked as towards the righteous, since he knows
when it is proper to punish men for their sins immediately; accordingly
he brake the power of the Assyrians the very first night that they
pitched their camp. Wherefore, had he judged that our nation was worthy
of freedom, or the Romans of punishment, he had immediately inflicted
punishment upon those Romans, as he did upon the Assyrians, when Pompey
began to meddle with our nation, or when after him Sosius came up
against us, or when Vespasian laid waste Galilee, or, lastly, when Titus
came first of all near to this city; although Magnus and Sosius did not
only suffer nothing, but took the city by force; as did Vespasian go
from the war he made against you to receive the empire; and as for
Titus, those springs that were formerly almost dried up when they were
under your power 18 since he is come, run more plentifully than they
did before; accordingly, you know that Siloam, as well as all the other
springs that were without the city, did so far fail, that water was sold
by distinct measures; whereas they now have such a great quantity of
water for your enemies, as is sufficient not only for drink both for
themselves and their cattle, but for watering their gardens also.
The same wonderful sign you had also experience of formerly, when the
forementioned king of Babylon made war against us, and when he took the
city, and burnt the temple; while yet I believe the Jews of that age
were not so impious as you are. Wherefore I cannot but suppose that God
is fled out of his sanctuary, and stands on the side of those against
whom you fight. Now even a man, if he be but a good man, will fly from
an impure house, and will hate those that are in it; and do you persuade
yourselves that God will abide with you in your iniquities, who sees all
secret things, and hears what is kept most private? Now what crime
is there, I pray you, that is so much as kept secret among you, or
is concealed by you? nay, what is there that is not open to your very
enemies? for you show your transgressions after a pompous manner, and
contend one with another which of you shall be more wicked than another;
and you make a public demonstration of your injustice, as if it were
virtue. However, there is a place left for your preservation, if you
be willing to accept of it; and God is easily reconciled to those that
confess their faults, and repent of them. O hard-hearted wretches as
you are! cast away all your arms, and take pity of your country already
going to ruin; return from your wicked ways, and have regard to the
excellency of that city which you are going to betray, to that excellent
temple with the donations of so many countries in it. Who could bear to
be the first that should set that temple on fire? who could be willing
that these things should be no more? and what is there that can better
deserve to be preserved? O insensible creatures, and more stupid than
are the stones themselves! And if you cannot look at these things with
discerning eyes, yet, however, have pity upon your families, and set
before every one of your eyes your children, and wives, and parents,
who will be gradually consumed either by famine or by war. I am sensible
that this danger will extend to my mother, and wife, and to that family
of mine who have been by no means ignoble, and indeed to one that hath
been very eminent in old time; and perhaps you may imagine that it is
on their account only that I give you this advice; if that be all, kill
them; nay, take my own blood as a reward, if it may but procure your
preservation; for I am ready to die, in case you will but return to a
sound mind after my death."






CHAPTER 10.


     How A Great Many Of The People Earnestly Endeavored To
     Desert To The Romans; As Also What Intolerable Things Those
     That Staid Behind Suffered By Famine, And The Sad
     Consequences Thereof.

1. As Josephus was speaking thus with a loud voice, the seditious would
neither yield to what he said, nor did they deem it safe for them to
alter their conduct; but as for the people, they had a great inclination
to desert to the Romans; accordingly, some of them sold what they had,
and even the most precious things that had been laid up as treasures by
them, for every small matter, and swallowed down pieces of gold, that
they might not be found out by the robbers; and when they had escaped
to the Romans, went to stool, and had wherewithal to provide plentifully
for themselves; for Titus let a great number of them go away into the
country, whither they pleased. And the main reasons why they were so
ready to desert were these: That now they should be freed from those
miseries which they had endured in that city, and yet should not be in
slavery to the Romans: however, John and Simon, with their factions, did
more carefully watch these men's going out than they did the coming
in of the Romans; and if any one did but afford the least shadow of
suspicion of such an intention, his throat was cut immediately.

2. But as for the richer sort, it proved all one to them whether they
staid in the city, or attempted to get out of it; for they were equally
destroyed in both cases; for every such person was put to death under
this pretense, that they were going to desert, but in reality that the
robbers might get what they had. The madness of the seditious did also
increase together with their famine, and both those miseries were
every day inflamed more and more; for there was no corn which any where
appeared publicly, but the robbers came running into, and searched
men's private houses; and then, if they found any, they tormented them,
because they had denied they had any; and if they found none, they
tormented them worse, because they supposed they had more carefully
concealed it. The indication they made use of whether they had any or
not was taken from the bodies of these miserable wretches; which, if
they were in good case, they supposed they were in no want at all of
food; but if they were wasted away, they walked off without searching
any further; nor did they think it proper to kill such as these, because
they saw they would very soon die of themselves for want of food. Many
there were indeed who sold what they had for one measure; it was of
wheat, if they were of the richer sort; but of barley, if they were
poorer. When these had so done, they shut themselves up in the inmost
rooms of their houses, and ate the corn they had gotten; some did it
without grinding it, by reason of the extremity of the want they were
in, and others baked bread of it, according as necessity and fear
dictated to them: a table was no where laid for a distinct meal, but
they snatched the bread out of the fire, half-baked, and ate it very
hastily.

3. It was now a miserable case, and a sight that would justly bring
tears into our eyes, how men stood as to their food, while the more
powerful had more than enough, and the weaker were lamenting [for want
of it.] But the famine was too hard for all other passions, and it is
destructive to nothing so much as to modesty; for what was otherwise
worthy of reverence was in this case despised; insomuch that children
pulled the very morsels that their fathers were eating out of their very
mouths, and what was still more to be pitied, so did the mothers do
as to their infants; and when those that were most dear were perishing
under their hands, they were not ashamed to take from them the very last
drops that might preserve their lives: and while they ate after this
manner, yet were they not concealed in so doing; but the seditious every
where came upon them immediately, and snatched away from them what they
had gotten from others; for when they saw any house shut up, this was
to them a signal that the people within had gotten some food; whereupon
they broke open the doors, and ran in, and took pieces of what they were
eating almost up out of their very throats, and this by force: the old
men, who held their food fast, were beaten; and if the women hid what
they had within their hands, their hair was torn for so doing; nor was
there any commiseration shown either to the aged or to the infants, but
they lifted up children from the ground as they hung upon the morsels
they had gotten, and shook them down upon the floor. But still they were
more barbarously cruel to those that had prevented their coming in, and
had actually swallowed down what they were going to seize upon, as if
they had been unjustly defrauded of their right. They also invented
terrible methods of torments to discover where any food was, and they
were these to stop up the passages of the privy parts of the miserable
wretches, and to drive sharp stakes up their fundaments; and a man was
forced to bear what it is terrible even to hear, in order to make him
confess that he had but one loaf of bread, or that he might discover a
handful of barley-meal that was concealed; and this was done when these
tormentors were not themselves hungry; for the thing had been less
barbarous had necessity forced them to it; but this was done to keep
their madness in exercise, and as making preparation of provisions for
themselves for the following days. These men went also to meet those
that had crept out of the city by night, as far as the Roman guards,
to gather some plants and herbs that grew wild; and when those people
thought they had got clear of the enemy, they snatched from them what
they had brought with them, even while they had frequently entreated
them, and that by calling upon the tremendous name of God, to give them
back some part of what they had brought; though these would not give
them the least crumb, and they were to be well contented that they were
only spoiled, and not slain at the same time.

4. These were the afflictions which the lower sort of people suffered
from these tyrants' guards; but for the men that were in dignity, and
withal were rich, they were carried before the tyrants themselves; some
of whom were falsely accused of laying treacherous plots, and so were
destroyed; others of them were charged with designs of betraying the
city to the Romans; but the readiest way of all was this, to suborn
somebody to affirm that they were resolved to desert to the enemy. And
he who was utterly despoiled of what he had by Simon was sent back again
to John, as of those who had been already plundered by Jotre, Simon got
what remained; insomuch that they drank the blood of the populace to one
another, and divided the dead bodies of the poor creatures between them;
so that although, on account of their ambition after dominion, they
contended with each other, yet did they very well agree in their wicked
practices; for he that did not communicate what he got by the miseries
of others to the other tyrant seemed to be too little guilty, and in one
respect only; and he that did not partake of what was so communicated to
him grieved at this, as at the loss of what was a valuable thing, that
he had no share in such barbarity.

5. It is therefore impossible to go distinctly over every instance
of these men's iniquity. I shall therefore speak my mind here at once
briefly:--That neither did any other city ever suffer such miseries,
nor did any age ever breed a generation more fruitful in wickedness than
this was, from the beginning of the world. Finally, they brought
the Hebrew nation into contempt, that they might themselves appear
comparatively less impious with regard to strangers. They confessed
what was true, that they were the slaves, the scum, and the spurious
and abortive offspring of our nation, while they overthrew the city
themselves, and forced the Romans, whether they would or no, to gain a
melancholy reputation, by acting gloriously against them, and did almost
draw that fire upon the temple, which they seemed to think came too
slowly; and indeed when they saw that temple burning from the upper
city, they were neither troubled at it, nor did they shed any tears on
that account, while yet these passions were discovered among the Romans
themselves; which circumstances we shall speak of hereafter in their
proper place, when we come to treat of such matters.






CHAPTER 11.


     How The Jews Were Crucified Before The Walls Of The City
     Concerning Antiochus Epiphanes; And How The Jews Overthrew
     The Banks That Had Been Raised By The Romans.

1. So now Titus's banks were advanced a great way, notwithstanding his
soldiers had been very much distressed from the wall. He then sent a
party of horsemen, and ordered they should lay ambushes for those that
went out into the valleys to gather food. Some of these were indeed
fighting men, who were not contented with what they got by rapine;
but the greater part of them were poor people, who were deterred from
deserting by the concern they were under for their own relations;
for they could not hope to escape away, together with their wives and
children, without the knowledge of the seditious; nor could they think
of leaving these relations to be slain by the robbers on their account;
nay, the severity of the famine made them bold in thus going out; so
nothing remained but that, when they were concealed from the robbers,
they should be taken by the enemy; and when they were going to be taken,
they were forced to defend themselves for fear of being punished;
as after they had fought, they thought it too late to make any
supplications for mercy; so they were first whipped, and then tormented
with all sorts of tortures, before they died, and were then crucified
before the wall of the city. This miserable procedure made Titus greatly
to pity them, while they caught every day five hundred Jews; nay, some
days they caught more: yet it did not appear to be safe for him to let
those that were taken by force go their way, and to set a guard over so
many he saw would be to make such as great deal them useless to him. The
main reason why he did not forbid that cruelty was this, that he hoped
the Jews might perhaps yield at that sight, out of fear lest they might
themselves afterwards be liable to the same cruel treatment. So the
soldiers, out of the wrath and hatred they bore the Jews, nailed those
they caught, one after one way, and another after another, to the
crosses, by way of jest, when their multitude was so great, that room
was wanting for the crosses, and crosses wanting for the bodies. 19

2. But so far were the seditious from repenting at this sad sight, that,
on the contrary, they made the rest of the multitude believe otherwise;
for they brought the relations of those that had deserted upon the
wall, with such of the populace as were very eager to go over upon the
security offered them, and showed them what miseries those underwent
who fled to the Romans; and told them that those who were caught were
supplicants to them, and not such as were taken prisoners. This sight
kept many of those within the city who were so eager to desert, till
the truth was known; yet did some of them run away immediately as unto
certain punishment, esteeming death from their enemies to be a quiet
departure, if compared with that by famine. So Titus commanded that the
hands of many of those that were caught should be cut off, that they
might not be thought deserters, and might be credited on account of the
calamity they were under, and sent them in to John and Simon, with this
exhortation, that they would now at length leave off [their madness],
and not force him to destroy the city, whereby they would have those
advantages of repentance, even in their utmost distress, that they would
preserve their own lives, and so find a city of their own, and that
temple which was their peculiar. He then went round about the banks that
were cast up, and hastened them, in order to show that his words
should in no long time be followed by his deeds. In answer to which the
seditious cast reproaches upon Caesar himself, and upon his father also,
and cried out, with a loud voice, that they contemned death, and
did well in preferring it before slavery; that they would do all the
mischief to the Romans they could while they had breath in them; and
that for their own city, since they were, as he said, to be destroyed,
they had no concern about it, and that the world itself was a better
temple to God than this. That yet this temple would be preserved by him
that inhabited therein, whom they still had for their assistant in this
war, and did therefore laugh at all his threatenings, which would come
to nothing, because the conclusion of the whole depended upon God only.
These words were mixed with reproaches, and with them they made a mighty
clamor.

3. In the mean time Antiochus Epiphanes came to the city, having with
him a considerable number of other armed men, and a band called the
Macedonian band about him, all of the same age, tall, and just past
their childhood, armed, and instructed after the Macedonian manner,
whence it was that they took that name. Yet were many of them unworthy
of so famous a nation; for it had so happened, that the king of
Commagene had flourished more than any other kings that were under the
power of the Romans, till a change happened in his condition; and when
he was become an old man, he declared plainly that we ought not to call
any man happy before he is dead. But this son of his, who was then
come thither before his father was decaying, said that he could not but
wonder what made the Romans so tardy in making their attacks upon the
wall. Now he was a warlike man, and naturally bold in exposing himself
to dangers; he was also so strong a man, that his boldness seldom failed
of having success. Upon this Titus smiled, and said he would share the
pains of an attack with him. However, Antiochus went as he then was, and
with his Macedonians made a sudden assault upon the wall; and, indeed,
for his own part, his strength and skill were so great, that he guarded
himself from the Jewish darts, and yet shot his darts at them, while yet
the young men with him were almost all sorely galled; for they had so
great a regard to the promises that had been made of their courage, that
they would needs persevere in their fighting, and at length many of them
retired, but not till they were wounded; and then they perceived that
true Macedonians, if they were to be conquerors, must have Alexander's
good fortune also.

4. Now as the Romans began to raise their banks on the twelfth day of
the month Artemisius, [Jyar,] so had they much ado to finish them by
the twenty-ninth day of the same month, after they had labored hard for
seventeen days continually. For there were now four great banks raised,
one of which was at the tower Antonia; this was raised by the fifth
legion, over against the middle of that pool which was called Struthius.
Another was cast up by the twelfth legion, at the distance of about
twenty cubits from the other. But the labors of the tenth legion, which
lay a great way off these, were on the north quarter, and at the pool
called Amygdalon; as was that of the fifteenth legion about thirty
cubits from it, and at the high priest's monument. And now, when the
engines were brought, John had from within undermined the space that was
over against the tower of Antonia, as far as the banks themselves,
and had supported the ground over the mine with beams laid across one
another, whereby the Roman works stood upon an uncertain foundation.
Then did he order such materials to be brought in as were daubed over
with pitch and bitumen, and set them on fire; and as the cross beams
that supported the banks were burning, the ditch yielded on the
sudden, and the banks were shaken down, and fell into the ditch with a
prodigious noise. Now at the first there arose a very thick smoke and
dust, as the fire was choked with the fall of the bank; but as the
suffocated materials were now gradually consumed, a plain flame brake
out; on which sudden appearance of the flame a consternation fell upon
the Romans, and the shrewdness of the contrivance discouraged them; and
indeed this accident coming upon them at a time when they thought they
had already gained their point, cooled their hopes for the time to
come. They also thought it would be to no purpose to take the pains
to extinguish the fire, since if it were extinguished, the banks were
swallowed up already [and become useless to them].

5. Two days after this, Simon and his party made an attempt to destroy
the other banks; for the Romans had brought their engines to bear there,
and began already to make the wall shake. And here one Tephtheus, of
Garsis, a city of Galilee, and Megassarus, one who was derived from some
of queen Mariamne's servants, and with them one from Adiabene, he was
the son of Nabateus, and called by the name of Chagiras, from the ill
fortune he had, the word signifying "a lame man," snatched some torches,
and ran suddenly upon the engines. Nor were there during this war any
men that ever sallied out of the city who were their superiors, either
in their boldness, or in the terror they struck into their enemies. For
they ran out upon the Romans, not as if they were enemies, but friends,
without fear or delay; nor did they leave their enemies till they had
rushed violently through the midst of them, and set their machines on
fire. And though they had darts thrown at them on every side, and were
on every side assaulted with their enemies' swords, yet did they not
withdraw themselves out of the dangers they were in, till the fire had
caught hold of the instruments; but when the flame went up, the Romans
came running from their camp to save their engines. Then did the
Jews hinder their succors from the wall, and fought with those that
endeavored to quench the fire, without any regard to the danger their
bodies were in. So the Romans pulled the engines out of the fire, while
the hurdles that covered them were on fire; but the Jews caught hold
of the battering rams through the flame itself, and held them fast,
although the iron upon them was become red hot; and now the fire spread
itself from the engines to the banks, and prevented those that came to
defend them; and all this while the Romans were encompassed round about
with the flame; and, despairing of saving their works from it, they
retired to their camp. Then did the Jews become still more and more
in number by the coming of those that were within the city to their
assistance; and as they were very bold upon the good success they
had had, their violent assaults were almost irresistible; nay, they
proceeded as far as the fortifications of the enemies' camp, and fought
with their guards. Now there stood a body of soldiers in array before
that camp, which succeeded one another by turns in their armor; and as
to those, the law of the Romans was terrible, that he who left his post
there, let the occasion be whatsoever it might be, he was to die for
it; so that body of soldiers, preferring rather to die in fighting
courageously, than as a punishment for their cowardice, stood firm; and
at the necessity these men were in of standing to it, many of the others
that had run away, out of shame, turned back again; and when they had
set the engines against the wall, they put the multitude from coming
more of them out of the city, [which they could the more easily do]
because they had made no provision for preserving or guarding their
bodies at this time; for the Jews fought now hand to hand with all that
came in their way, and, without any caution, fell against the points of
their enemies' spears, and attacked them bodies against bodies; for they
were now too hard for the Romans, not so much by their other warlike
actions, as by these courageous assaults they made upon them; and the
Romans gave way more to their boldness than they did to the sense of the
harm they had received from them.

6. And now Titus was come from the tower of Antonia, whither he was
gone to look out for a place for raising other banks, and reproached the
soldiers greatly for permitting their own walls to be in danger, when
they had taken the wails of their enemies, and sustained the fortune
of men besieged, while the Jews were allowed to sally out against them,
though they were already in a sort of prison. He then went round about
the enemy with some chosen troops, and fell upon their flank himself; so
the Jews, who had been before assaulted in their faces, wheeled about to
Titus, and continued the fight. The armies also were now mixed one among
another, and the dust that was raised so far hindered them from seeing
one another, and the noise that was made so far hindered them from
hearing one another, that neither side could discern an enemy from a
friend. However, the Jews did not flinch, though not so much from their
real strength, as from their despair of deliverance. The Romans also
would not yield, by reason of the regard they had to glory, and to
their reputation in war, and because Caesar himself went into the danger
before them; insomuch that I cannot but think the Romans would in the
conclusion have now taken even the whole multitude of the Jews, so
very angry were they at them, had these not prevented the upshot of
the battle, and retired into the city. However, seeing the banks of the
Romans were demolished, these Romans were very much cast down upon the
loss of what had cost them so long pains, and this in one hour's time.
And many indeed despaired of taking the city with their usual engines of
war only.






CHAPTER 12.


     Titus Thought Fit To Encompass The City Round With A Wall;
     After Which The Famine Consumed The People By Whole Houses
     And Families Together.

1. And now did Titus consult with his commanders what was to be done.
Those that were of the warmest tempers thought he should bring the whole
army against the city and storm the wall; for that hitherto no more
than a part of their army had fought with the Jews; but that in case the
entire army was to come at once, they would not be able to sustain their
attacks, but would be overwhelmed by their darts. But of those that were
for a more cautious management, some were for raising their banks again;
and others advised to let the banks alone, but to lie still before the
city, to guard against the coming out of the Jews, and against their
carrying provisions into the city, and so to leave the enemy to the
famine, and this without direct fighting with them; for that despair was
not to be conquered, especially as to those who are desirous to die by
the sword, while a more terrible misery than that is reserved for them.
However, Titus did not think it fit for so great an army to lie entirely
idle, and that yet it was in vain to fight with those that would be
destroyed one by another; he also showed them how impracticable it was
to cast up any more banks, for want of materials, and to guard against
the Jews coming out still more impracticable; as also, that to encompass
the whole city round with his army was not very easy, by reason of its
magnitude, and the difficulty of the situation, and on other accounts
dangerous, upon the sallies the Jews might make out of the city. For
although they might guard the known passages out of the place, yet would
they, when they found themselves under the greatest distress, contrive
secret passages out, as being well acquainted with all such places; and
if any provisions were carried in by stealth, the siege would thereby be
longer delayed. He also owned that he was afraid that the length of time
thus to be spent would diminish the glory of his success; for though
it be true that length of time will perfect every thing, yet that to
do what we do in a little time is still necessary to the gaining
reputation. That therefore his opinion was, that if they aimed at
quickness joined with security, they must build a wall round about the
whole city; which was, he thought, the only way to prevent the Jews from
coming out any way, and that then they would either entirely despair of
saving the city, and so would surrender it up to him, or be still the
more easily conquered when the famine had further weakened them; for
that besides this wall, he would not lie entirely at rest afterward, but
would take care then to have banks raised again, when those that would
oppose them were become weaker. But that if any one should think such a
work to be too great, and not to be finished without much difficulty, he
ought to consider that it is not fit for Romans to undertake any small
work, and that none but God himself could with ease accomplish any great
thing whatsoever.

2. These arguments prevailed with the commanders. So Titus gave orders
that the army should be distributed to their several shares of this
work; and indeed there now came upon the soldiers a certain divine fury,
so that they did not only part the whole wall that was to be built
among them, nor did only one legion strive with another, but the lesser
divisions of the army did the same; insomuch that each soldier was
ambitious to please his decurion, each decurion his centurion, each
centurion his tribune, and the ambition of the tribunes was to please
their superior commanders, while Caesar himself took notice of and
rewarded the like contention in those commanders; for he went round
about the works many times every day, and took a view of what was done.
Titus began the wall from the camp of the Assyrians, where his own camp
was pitched, and drew it down to the lower parts of Cenopolis; thence
it went along the valley of Cedron, to the Mount of Olives; it then
bent towards the south, and encompassed the mountain as far as the rock
called Peristereon, and that other hill which lies next it, and is over
the valley which reaches to Siloam; whence it bended again to the west,
and went down to the valley of the Fountain, beyond which it went up
again at the monument of Ananus the high priest, and encompassing that
mountain where Pompey had formerly pitched his camp, it returned back
to the north side of the city, and was carried on as far as a certain
village called "The House of the Erebinthi;" after which it encompassed
Herod's monument, and there, on the east, was joined to Titus's own
camp, where it began. Now the length of this wall was forty furlongs,
one only abated. Now at this wall without were erected thirteen places
to keep garrison in, whose circumferences, put together, amounted to
ten furlongs; the whole was completed in three days; so that what would
naturally have required some months was done in so short an interval as
is incredible. When Titus had therefore encompassed the city with this
wall, and put garrisons into proper places, he went round the wall, at
the first watch of the night, and observed how the guard was kept; the
second watch he allotted to Alexander; the commanders of legions took
the third watch. They also cast lots among themselves who should be upon
the watch in the night time, and who should go all night long round the
spaces that were interposed between the garrisons.

3. So all hope of escaping was now cut off from the Jews, together with
their liberty of going out of the city. Then did the famine widen its
progress, and devoured the people by whole houses and families; the
upper rooms were full of women and children that were dying by famine,
and the lanes of the city were full of the dead bodies of the aged; the
children also and the young men wandered about the market-places like
shadows, all swelled with the famine, and fell down dead, wheresoever
their misery seized them. As for burying them, those that were sick
themselves were not able to do it; and those that were hearty and well
were deterred from doing it by the great multitude of those dead bodies,
and by the uncertainty there was how soon they should die themselves;
for many died as they were burying others, and many went to their
coffins before that fatal hour was come. Nor was there any lamentations
made under these calamities, nor were heard any mournful complaints;
but the famine confounded all natural passions; for those who were just
going to die looked upon those that were gone to rest before them with
dry eyes and open mouths. A deep silence also, and a kind of deadly
night, had seized upon the city; while yet the robbers were still more
terrible than these miseries were themselves; for they brake open those
houses which were no other than graves of dead bodies, and plundered
them of what they had; and carrying off the coverings of their bodies,
went out laughing, and tried the points of their swords in their dead
bodies; and, in order to prove what metal they were made of they thrust
some of those through that still lay alive upon the ground; but for
those that entreated them to lend them their right hand and their sword
to despatch them, they were too proud to grant their requests, and left
them to be consumed by the famine. Now every one of these died with
their eyes fixed upon the temple, and left the seditious alive behind
them. Now the seditious at first gave orders that the dead should be
buried out of the public treasury, as not enduring the stench of their
dead bodies. But afterwards, when they could not do that, they had them
cast down from the walls into the valleys beneath.

4. However, when Titus, in going his rounds along those valleys, saw
them full of dead bodies, and the thick putrefaction running about them,
he gave a groan; and, spreading out his hands to heaven, called God to
witness that this was not his doing; and such was the sad case of
the city itself. But the Romans were very joyful, since none of the
seditious could now make sallies out of the city, because they were
themselves disconsolate, and the famine already touched them also. These
Romans besides had great plenty of corn and other necessaries out of
Syria, and out of the neighboring provinces; many of whom would stand
near to the wall of the city, and show the people what great quantities
of provisions they had, and so make the enemy more sensible of their
famine, by the great plenty, even to satiety, which they had themselves.
However, when the seditious still showed no inclinations of yielding,
Titus, out of his commiseration of the people that remained, and out
of his earnest desire of rescuing what was still left out of these
miseries, began to raise his banks again, although materials for them
were hard to be come at; for all the trees that were about the city had
been already cut down for the making of the former banks. Yet did the
soldiers bring with them other materials from the distance of ninety
furlongs, and thereby raised banks in four parts, much greater than the
former, though this was done only at the tower of Antonia. So Caesar
went his rounds through the legions, and hastened on the works, and
showed the robbers that they were now in his hands. But these men, and
these only, were incapable of repenting of the wickednesses they had
been guilty of; and separating their souls from their bodies, they used
them both as if they belonged to other folks, and not to themselves. For
no gentle affection could touch their souls, nor could any pain affect
their bodies, since they could still tear the dead bodies of the people
as dogs do, and fill the prisons with those that were sick.






CHAPTER 13.


     The Great Slaughters And Sacrilege That Were In Jerusalem.

1. Accordingly Simon would not suffer Matthias, by whose means he got
possession of the city, to go off without torment. This Matthias was the
son of Boethus, and was one of the high priests, one that had been very
faithful to the people, and in great esteem with them; he, when the
multitude were distressed by the zealots, among whom John was numbered,
persuaded the people to admit this Simon to come in to assist them,
while he had made no terms with him, nor expected any thing that was
evil from him. But when Simon was come in, and had gotten the city under
his power, he esteemed him that had advised them to admit him as his
enemy equally with the rest, as looking upon that advice as a piece
of his simplicity only; so he had him then brought before him, and
condemned to die for being on the side of the Romans, without giving him
leave to make his defense. He condemned also his three sons to die with
him; for as to the fourth, he prevented him by running away to Titus
before. And when he begged for this, that he might be slain before his
sons, and that as a favor, on account that he had procured the gates of
the city to be opened to him, he gave order that he should be slain the
last of them all; so he was not slain till he had seen his sons slain
before his eyes, and that by being produced over against the Romans; for
such a charge had Simon given to Artanus, the son of Bamadus, who was
the most barbarous of all his guards. He also jested upon him, and told
him that he might now see whether those to whom he intended to go over
would send him any succors or not; but still he forbade their dead
bodies should be buried. After the slaughter of these, a certain priest,
Ananias, the son of Masambalus, a person of eminency, as also Aristens,
the scribe of the sanhedrim, and born at Emmaus, and with them fifteen
men of figure among the people, were slain. They also kept Josephus's
father in prison, and made public proclamation, that no citizen
whosoever should either speak to him himself, or go into his company
among others, for fear he should betray them. They also slew such as
joined in lamenting these men, without any further examination.

2. Now when Judas, the son of Judas, who was one of Simon's under
officers, and a person intrusted by him to keep one of the towers, saw
this procedure of Simon, he called together ten of those under him, that
were most faithful to him, [perhaps this was done partly out of pity
to those that had so barbarously been put to death, but principally in
order to provide for his own safety,] and spoke thus to them: "How long
shall we bear these miseries? or what hopes have we of deliverance by
thus continuing faithful to such wicked wretches? Is not the famine
already come against us? Are not the Romans in a manner gotten within
the city? Is not Simon become unfaithful to his benefactors? and
is there not reason to fear he will very soon bring us to the like
punishment, while the security the Romans offer us is sure? Come on,
let us surrender up this wall, and save ourselves and the city. Nor
will Simon be very much hurt, if, now he despairs of deliverance, he
be brought to justice a little sooner than he thinks on." Now these ten
were prevailed upon by those arguments; so he sent the rest of those
that were under him, some one way, and some another, that no discovery
might be made of what they had resolved upon. Accordingly, he called to
the Romans from the tower about the third hour; but they, some of them
out of pride, despised what he said, and others of them did not believe
him to be in earnest, though the greatest number delayed the matter,
as believing they should get possession of the city in a little time,
without any hazard. But when Titus was just coming thither with his
armed men, Simon was acquainted with the matter before he came,
and presently took the tower into his own custody, before it was
surrendered, and seized upon these men, and put them to death in the
sight of the Romans themselves; and when he had mangled their dead
bodies, he threw them down before the wall of the city.

3. In the mean time, Josephus, as he was going round the city, had his
head wounded by a stone that was thrown at him; upon which he fell down
as giddy. Upon which fall of his the Jews made a sally, and he had been
hurried away into the city, if Caesar had not sent men to protect him
immediately; and as these men were fighting, Josephus was taken up,
though he heard little of what was done. So the seditious supposed they
had now slain that man whom they were the most desirous of killing, and
made thereupon a great noise, in way of rejoicing. This accident
was told in the city, and the multitude that remained became very
disconsolate at the news, as being persuaded that he was really dead, on
whose account alone they could venture to desert to the Romans. But when
Josephus's mother heard in prison that her son was dead, she said to
those that watched about her, That she had always been of opinion, since
the siege of Jotapata, [that he would be slain,] and she should never
enjoy him alive any more. She also made great lamentation privately to
the maid-servants that were about her, and said, That this was all the
advantage she had of bringing so extraordinary a person as this son into
the world; that she should not be able even to bury that son of hers,
by whom she expected to have been buried herself. However, this false
report did not put his mother to pain, nor afford merriment to the
robbers, long; for Josephus soon recovered of his wound, and came
out, and cried out aloud, That it would not be long ere they should
be punished for this wound they had given him. He also made a fresh
exhortation to the people to come out upon the security that would be
given them. This sight of Josephus encouraged the people greatly, and
brought a great consternation upon the seditious.

4. Hereupon some of the deserters, having no other way, leaped down from
the wall immediately, while others of them went out of the city with
stones, as if they would fight them; but thereupon they fled away to the
Romans. But here a worse fate accompanied these than what they had found
within the city; and they met with a quicker despatch from the too great
abundance they had among the Romans, than they could have done from the
famine among the Jews; for when they came first to the Romans, they were
puffed up by the famine, and swelled like men in a dropsy; after which
they all on the sudden overfilled those bodies that were before empty,
and so burst asunder, excepting such only as were skillful enough to
restrain their appetites, and by degrees took in their food into bodies
unaccustomed thereto. Yet did another plague seize upon those that were
thus preserved; for there was found among the Syrian deserters a certain
person who was caught gathering pieces of gold out of the excrements
of the Jews' bellies; for the deserters used to swallow such pieces of
gold, as we told you before, when they came out, and for these did the
seditious search them all; for there was a great quantity of gold in the
city, insomuch that as much was now sold [in the Roman camp] for
twelve Attic [drams], as was sold before for twenty-five. But when this
contrivance was discovered in one instance, the fame of it filled their
several camps, that the deserters came to them full of gold. So the
multitude of the Arabians, with the Syrians, cut up those that came as
supplicants, and searched their bellies. Nor does it seem to me that any
misery befell the Jews that was more terrible than this, since in one
night's time about two thousand of these deserters were thus dissected.

5. When Titus came to the knowledge of this wicked practice, he had like
to have surrounded those that had been guilty of it with his horse, and
have shot them dead; and he had done it, had not their number been so
very great, and those that were liable to this punishment would have
been manifold more than those whom they had slain. However, he called
together the commanders of the auxiliary troops he had with him, as well
as the commanders of the Roman legions, [for some of his own soldiers
had been also guilty herein, as he had been informed,] and had great
indignation against both sorts of them, and said to them, "What! have
any of my own soldiers done such things as this out of the uncertain
hope of gain, without regarding their own weapons, which are made of
silver and gold? Moreover, do the Arabians and Syrians now first of
all begin to govern themselves as they please, and to indulge their
appetites in a foreign war, and then, out of their barbarity in
murdering men, and out of their hatred to the Jews, get it ascribed to
the Romans?" for this infamous practice was said to be spread among some
of his own soldiers also. Titus then threatened that he would put such
men to death, if any of them were discovered to be so insolent as to
do so again; moreover, he gave it in charge to the legions, that they
should make a search after such as were suspected, and should bring
them to him. But it appeared that the love of money was too hard for all
their dread of punishment, and a vehement desire of gain is natural to
men, and no passion is so venturesome as covetousness; otherwise such
passions have certain bounds, and are subordinate to fear. But in
reality it was God who condemned the whole nation, and turned every
course that was taken for their preservation to their destruction. This,
therefore, which was forbidden by Caesar under such a threatening, was
ventured upon privately against the deserters, and these barbarians
would go out still, and meet those that ran away before any saw them,
and looking about them to see that no Roman spied them, they dissected
them, and pulled this polluted money out of their bowels; which money
was still found in a few of them, while yet a great many were destroyed
by the bare hope there was of thus getting by them, which miserable
treatment made many that were deserting to return back again into the
city.

6. But as for John, when he could no longer plunder the people,
he betook himself to sacrilege, and melted down many of the sacred
utensils, which had been given to the temple; as also many of those
vessels which were necessary for such as ministered about holy things,
the caldrons, the dishes, and the tables; nay, he did not abstain from
those pouring vessels that were sent them by Augustus and his wife; for
the Roman emperors did ever both honor and adorn this temple; whereas
this man, who was a Jew, seized upon what were the donations of
foreigners, and said to those that were with him, that it was proper for
them to use Divine things, while they were fighting for the Divinity,
without fear, and that such whose warfare is for the temple should live
of the temple; on which account he emptied the vessels of that
sacred wine and oil, which the priests kept to be poured on the
burnt-offerings, and which lay in the inner court of the temple, and
distributed it among the multitude, who, in their anointing themselves
and drinking, used [each of them] above an hin of them. And here I
cannot but speak my mind, and what the concern I am under dictates to
me, and it is this: I suppose, that had the Romans made any longer delay
in coming against these villains, that the city would either have been
swallowed up by the ground opening upon them, or been overflowed by
water, or else been destroyed by such thunder as the country of Sodom
20 perished by, for it had brought forth a generation of men much more
atheistical than were those that suffered such punishments; for by their
madness it was that all the people came to be destroyed.

7. And, indeed, why do I relate these particular calamities? while
Manneus, the son of Lazarus, came running to Titus at this very time,
and told him that there had been carried out through that one gate,
which was intrusted to his care, no fewer than a hundred and fifteen
thousand eight hundred and eighty dead bodies, in the interval between
the fourteenth day of the month Xanthicus, [Nisan,] when the Romans
pitched their camp by the city, and the first day of the month Panemus
[Tamuz]. This was itself a prodigious multitude; and though this man was
not himself set as a governor at that gate, yet was he appointed to pay
the public stipend for carrying these bodies out, and so was obliged of
necessity to number them, while the rest were buried by their relations;
though all their burial was but this, to bring them away, and cast them
out of the city. After this man there ran away to Titus many of the
eminent citizens, and told him the entire number of the poor that were
dead, and that no fewer than six hundred thousand were thrown out at the
gates, though still the number of the rest could not be discovered; and
they told him further, that when they were no longer able to carry out
the dead bodies of the poor, they laid their corpses on heaps in very
large houses, and shut them up therein; as also that a medimnus of wheat
was sold for a talent; and that when, a while afterward, it was not
possible to gather herbs, by reason the city was all walled about, some
persons were driven to that terrible distress as to search the common
sewers and old dunghills of cattle, and to eat the dung which they got
there; and what they of old could not endure so much as to see they now
used for food. When the Romans barely heard all this, they commiserated
their case; while the seditious, who saw it also, did not repent,
but suffered the same distress to come upon themselves; for they were
blinded by that fate which was already coming upon the city, and upon
themselves also.

WAR BOOK 5 FOOTNOTES

1 (return) [ This appears to be the first time that the zealots ventured
to pollute this most sacred court of the temple, which was the court of
the priests, wherein the temple itself and the altar stood. So that the
conjecture of those that would interpret that Zacharias, who was slain
"between the temple and the altar" several months before, B. IV. ch. 5.
sect. 4, as if he were slain there by these zealots, is groundless, as I
have noted on that place already.]


2 (return) [ The Levites.]


3 (return) [ This is an excellent reflection of Josephus, including his
hopes of the restoration of the Jews upon their repentance, See
Antiq. B. IV. ch. 8. sect. 46, which is the grand "Hope of Israel," as
Manasseh-ben-Israel, the famous Jewish Rabbi, styles it, in his small
but remarkable treatise on that subject, of which the Jewish prophets
are every where full. See the principal of those prophecies collected
together at the end of the Essay on the Revelation, p. 822, etc.]


4 (return) [ This destruction of such a vast quantity of corn and other
provisions, as was sufficient for many years was the direct occasion
of that terrible famine, which consumed incredible numbers of Jews in
Jerusalem during its siege. Nor probably could the Romans have taken
this city, after all, had not these seditious Jews been so infatuated as
thus madly to destroy, what Josephus here justly styles, "The nerves of
their power."]


5 (return) [ This timber, we see, was designed for the rebuilding those
twenty additional cubits of the holy house above the hundred, which had
fallen down some years before. See the note on Antiq. B. XV. ch. 11.
sect. 3.]


6 (return) [ There being no gate on the west, and only on the west, side
of the court of the priests, and so no steps there, this was the only
side that the seditious, under this John of Gischala, could bring their
engines close to the cloisters of that court end-ways, though upon the
floor of the court of Israel. See the scheme of that temple, in the
description of the temples hereto belonging.]


7 (return) [ We may here note, that Titus is here called "a king," and
"Caesar," by Josephus, even while he was no more than the emperor's son,
and general of the Roman army, and his father Vespasian was still alive;
just as the New Testament says "Archelaus reigned," or "was king,"
Matthew 2:22, though he was properly no more than ethnarch, as Josephus
assures us, Antiq. B. XVII. ch. 11. sect. 4; Of the War, B. II. ch. 6.
sect. 3. Thus also the Jews called the Roman emperors "kings," though
they never took that title to themselves: "We have no king but Caesar,"
John 19:15. "Submit to the king as supreme," 1 Peter 2:13, 17; which is
also the language of the Apostolical Constitutions, II. II, 31; IV.
13; V. 19; VI. 2, 25; VII. 16; VIII. 2, 13; and elsewhere in the New
Testament, Matthew 10:18; 17:25; 1 Timothy 2:2; and in Josephus also;
though I suspect Josephus particularly esteemed Titus as joint king with
his father ever since his divine dreams that declared them both such, B.
III. ch. 8. sect. 9.]


8 (return) [ This situation of the Mount of Olives, on the east of
Jerusalem, at about the distance of five or six furlongs, with the
valley of Cedron interposed between that mountain and the city, are
things well known both in the Old and New Testament, in Josephus
elsewhere, and in all the descriptions of Palestine.]


9 (return) [ Here we see the true occasion of those vast numbers of Jews
that were in Jerusalem during this siege by Titus, and perished therein;
that the siege began at the feast of the passover, when such prodigious
multitudes of Jews and proselytes of the gate were come from all parts
of Judea, and from other countries, in order to celebrate that great
festival. See the note B. VI. ch. 9. sect. 3. Tacitus himself informs
us, that the number of men, women, and children in Jerusalem, when it
was besieged by the Romans, as he had been informed. This information
must have been taken from the Romans: for Josephus never recounts the
numbers of those that were besieged, only he lets us know, that of the
vulgar, carried dead out of the gates, and buried at the public charges,
was the like number of 600,000, ch. viii. sect. 7. However, when
Cestius Gallus came first to the siege, that sum in Tacitus is no way
disagreeable to Josephus's history, though they were become much more
numerous when Titus encompassed the city at the passover. As to the
number that perished during this siege, Josephus assures us, as we
shall see hereafter, they were 1,100,000, besides 97,000 captives. But
Tacitus's history of the last part of this siege is not now extant; so
we cannot compare his parallel numbers with those of Josephus.]


10 (return) [ Perhaps, says Dr. Hudson, here was that gate, called the
"Gate of the Corner," in 2 Chronicles 26:9. See ch. 4. sect. 2]


11 (return) [ These dove-courts in Josephus, built by Herod the Great,
are, in the opinion of Reland, the very same that are mentioned by the
Talmudists, and named by them "Herod's dove courts." Nor is there any
reason to suppose otherwise, since in both accounts they were expressly
tame pigeons which were kept in them.]


12 (return) [ See the description of the temples hereto belonging, ch.
15. But note, that what Josephus here says of the original scantiness of
this Mount Moriah, that it was quite too little for the temple, and that
at first it held only one cloister or court of Solomon's building, and
that the foundations were forced to be added long afterwards by degrees,
to render it capable of the cloisters for the other courts, etc., is
without all foundation in the Scriptures, and not at all confirmed by
his exacter account in the Antiquities. All that is or can be true here
is this, that when the court of the Gentiles was long afterward to be
encompassed with cloisters, the southern foundation for these cloisters
was found not to be large or firm enough, and was raised, and that
additional foundation supported by great pillars and arches under
ground, which Josephus speaks of elsewhere, Antiq. B. XV. ch. 11. sect.
3, and which Mr. Maundrel saw, and describes, p. 100, as extant under
ground at this day.]


13 (return) [ What Josephus seems here to mean is this: that these
pillars, supporting the cloisters in the second court, had their
foundations or lowest parts as deep as the floor of the first or lowest
court; but that so far of those lowest parts as were equal to the
elevation of the upper floor above the lowest were, and must be, hidden
on the inside by the ground or rock itself, on which that upper
court was built; so that forty cubits visible below were reduced to
twenty-five visible above, and implies the difference of their heights
to be fifteen cubits. The main difficulty lies here, how fourteen or
fifteen steps should give an ascent of fifteen cubits, half a cubit
seeming sufficient for a single step. Possibly there were fourteen or
fifteen steps at the partition wall, and fourteen or fifteen more thence
into the court itself, which would bring the whole near to the just
proportion. See sect. 3, infra. But I determine nothing.]


14 (return) [ These three guards that lay in the tower of Antonia must
be those that guarded the city, the temple, and the tower of Antonia.]


15 (return) [ What should be the meaning of this signal or watchword,
when the watchmen saw a stone coming from the engine, "The Stone
Cometh," or what mistake there is in the reading, I cannot tell. The
MSS., both Greek and Latin, all agree in this reading; and I cannot
approve of any groundless conjectural alteration of the text from ro to
lop, that not the son or a stone, but that the arrow or dart cometh;
as hath been made by Dr. Hudson, and not corrected by Havercamp. Had
Josephus written even his first edition of these books of the war in
pure Hebrew, or had the Jews then used the pure Hebrew at Jerusalem, the
Hebrew word for a son is so like that for a stone, ben and eben, that
such a correction might have been more easily admitted. But Josephus
wrote his former edition for the use of the Jews beyond Euphrates, and
so in the Chaldee language, as he did this second edition in the Greek
language; and bar was the Chaldee word for son, instead of the Hebrew
ben, and was used not only in Chaldea, etc. but in Judea also, as the
New Testament informs us. Dio lets us know that the very Romans at Rome
pronounced the name of Simon the son of Giora, Bar Poras for Bar Gioras,
as we learn from Xiphiline, p. 217. Reland takes notice, "that many will
here look for a mystery, as though the meaning were, that the Son of God
came now to take vengeance on the sins of the Jewish nation;" which is
indeed the truth of the fact, but hardly what the Jews could now mean;
unless possibly by way of derision of Christ's threatening so often
made, that he would come at the head of the Roman army for their
destruction. But even this interpretation has but a very small degree of
probability. If I were to make an emendation by mere conjecture, I would
read instead of, though the likeness be not so great as in lo; because
that is the word used by Josephus just before, as has been already noted
on this very occasion, while, an arrow or dart, is only a poetical word,
and never used by Josephus elsewhere, and is indeed no way suitable
to the occasion, this engine not throwing arrows or darts, but great
stones, at this time.]


16 (return) [ Josephus supposes, in this his admirable speech to the
Jews, that not Abraham only, but Pharaoh king of Egypt, prayed towards
a temple at Jerusalem, or towards Jerusalem itself, in which were Mount
Sion and Mount Moriah, on which the tabernacle and temple did afterwards
stand; and this long before either the Jewish tabernacle or temple were
built. Nor is the famous command given by God to Abraham, to go two
or three days' journey, on purpose to offer up his son Isaac there,
unfavorable to such a notion.]


17 (return) [ Note here, that Josephus, in this his same admirable
speech, calls the Syrians, nay, even the Philistines, on the most south
part of Syria, Assyrians; which Reland observes as what was common among
the ancient writers. Note also, that Josephus might well put the Jews
in mind, as he does here more than once, of their wonderful and truly
miraculous deliverance from Sennacherib, king of Assyria, while the
Roman army, and himself with them, were now encamped upon and beyond
that very spot of ground where the Assyrian army lay seven hundred and
eighty years before, and which retained the very name of the Camp of the
Assyrians to that very day. See chap. 7. sect. 3, and chap. 12. sect.
2.]


18 (return) [ This drying up of the Jerusalem fountain of Siloam when
the Jews wanted it, and its flowing abundantly when the enemies of the
Jews wanted it, and these both in the days of Zedekiah and of Titus,
[and this last as a certain event well known by the Jews at that time,
as Josephus here tells them openly to their faces,] are very remarkable
instances of a Divine Providence for the punishment of the Jewish
nation, when they were grown very wicked, at both those times of the
destruction of Jerusalem.]


19 (return) [ Reland very properly takes notice here, how justly this
judgment came upon the Jews, when they were crucified in such multitudes
together, that the Romans wanted room for the crosses, and crosses
for the bodies of these Jews, since they had brought this judgment on
themselves by the crucifixion of their Messiah.]


20 (return) [ Josephus, both here and before, B. IV. ch. 8. sect. 4,
esteems the land of Sodom, not as part of the lake Asphaltites, or under
its waters, but near it only, as Tacitus also took the same notion from
him, Hist. V. ch. 6. 7, which the great Reland takes to be the very
truth, both in his note on this place, and in his Palestina, tom. I. p.
254-258; though I rather suppose part of that region of Pentapolis to be
now under the waters of the south part of that sea, but perhaps not the
whole country.]











BOOK VI.


     Containing The Interval Of About One Month.

     From The Great Extremity To Which The Jews Were Reduced To
     The Taking Of Jerusalem By Titus.





CHAPTER 1.


     That The Miseries Still Grew Worse; And How The Romans Made
     An Assault Upon The Tower Of Antonia.

1. Thus did the miseries of Jerusalem grow worse and worse every day,
and the seditious were still more irritated by the calamities they were
under, even while the famine preyed upon themselves, after it had preyed
upon the people. And indeed the multitude of carcasses that lay in
heaps one upon another was a horrible sight, and produced a pestilential
stench, which was a hinderance to those that would make sallies out of
the city, and fight the enemy: but as those were to go in battle-array,
who had been already used to ten thousand murders, and must tread upon
those dead bodies as they marched along, so were not they terrified,
nor did they pity men as they marched over them; nor did they deem this
affront offered to the deceased to be any ill omen to themselves; but
as they had their right hands already polluted with the murders of their
own countrymen, and in that condition ran out to fight with foreigners,
they seem to me to have cast a reproach upon God himself, as if he were
too slow in punishing them; for the war was not now gone on with as if
they had any hope of victory; for they gloried after a brutish manner
in that despair of deliverance they were already in. And now the
Romans, although they were greatly distressed in getting together their
materials, raised their banks in one and twenty days, after they had cut
down all the trees that were in the country that adjoined to the city,
and that for ninety furlongs round about, as I have already related. And
truly the very view itself of the country was a melancholy thing; for
those places which were before adorned with trees and pleasant gardens
were now become a desolate country every way, and its trees were all cut
down: nor could any foreigner that had formerly seen Judea and the most
beautiful suburbs of the city, and now saw it as a desert, but lament
and mourn sadly at so great a change: for the war had laid all the signs
of beauty quite waste: nor if any one that had known the place before,
had come on a sudden to it now, would he have known it again; but
though he were at the city itself, yet would he have inquired for it
notwithstanding.

2. And now the banks were finished, they afforded a foundation for fear
both to the Romans and to the Jews; for the Jews expected that the city
would be taken, unless they could burn those banks, as did the Romans
expect that, if these were once burnt down, they should never be able to
take it; for there was a mighty scarcity of materials, and the bodies
of the soldiers began to fail with such hard labors, as did their souls
faint with so many instances of ill success; nay, the very calamities
themselves that were in the city proved a greater discouragement to the
Romans than those within the city; for they found the fighting men of
the Jews to be not at all mollified among such their sore afflictions,
while they had themselves perpetually less and less hopes of success,
and their banks were forced to yield to the stratagems of the enemy,
their engines to the firmness of their wall, and their closest fights
to the boldness of their attack; and, what was their greatest
discouragement of all, they found the Jews' courageous souls to be
superior to the multitude of the miseries they were under, by their
sedition, their famine, and the war itself; insomuch that they were
ready to imagine that the violence of their attacks was invincible,
and that the alacrity they showed would not be discouraged by their
calamities; for what would not those be able to bear if they should be
fortunate, who turned their very misfortunes to the improvement of their
valor! These considerations made the Romans to keep a stronger guard
about their banks than they formerly had done.

3. But now John and his party took care for securing themselves
afterward, even in case this wall should be thrown down, and fell to
their work before the battering rams were brought against them. Yet did
they not compass what they endeavored to do, but as they were gone out
with their torches, they came back under great discouragement before
they came near to the banks; and the reasons were these: that, in the
first place, their conduct did not seem to be unanimous, but they went
out in distinct parties, and at distinct intervals, and after a slow
manner, and timorously, and, to say all in a word, without a Jewish
courage; for they were now defective in what is peculiar to our nation,
that is, in boldness, in violence of assault, and in running upon the
enemy all together, and in persevering in what they go about, though
they do not at first succeed in it; but they now went out in a more
languid manner than usual, and at the same time found the Romans set in
array, and more courageous than ordinary, and that they guarded their
banks both with their bodies and their entire armor, and this to such
a degree on all sides, that they left no room for the fire to get among
them, and that every one of their souls was in such good courage, that
they would sooner die than desert their ranks; for besides their notion
that all their hopes were cut off, in case these their works were once
burnt, the soldiers were greatly ashamed that subtlety should quite be
too hard for courage, madness for armor, multitude for skill, and Jews
for Romans. The Romans had now also another advantage, in that their
engines for sieges co-operated with them in throwing darts and stones as
far as the Jews, when they were coming out of the city; whereby the man
that fell became an impediment to him that was next to him, as did the
danger of going farther make them less zealous in their attempts; and
for those that had run under the darts, some of them were terrified by
the good order and closeness of the enemies' ranks before they came to a
close fight, and others were pricked with their spears, and turned back
again; at length they reproached one another for their cowardice, and
retired without doing any thing. This attack was made upon the first
day of the month Panemus [Tamuz.] So when the Jews were retreated, the
Romans brought their engines, although they had all the while stones
thrown at them from the tower of Antonia, and were assaulted by fire and
sword, and by all sorts of darts, which necessity afforded the Jews to
make use of; for although these had great dependence on their own wall,
and a contempt of the Roman engines, yet did they endeavor to hinder
the Romans from bringing them. Now these Romans struggled hard, on the
contrary, to bring them, as deeming that this zeal of the Jews was
in order to avoid any impression to be made on the tower of Antonia,
because its wall was but weak, and its foundations rotten. However, that
tower did not yield to the blows given it from the engines; yet did
the Romans bear the impressions made by the enemies' darts which were
perpetually cast at them, and did not give way to any of those dangers
that came upon them from above, and so they brought their engines to
bear. But then, as they were beneath the other, and were sadly wounded
by the stones thrown down upon them, some of them threw their shields
over their bodies, and partly with their hands, and partly with their
bodies, and partly with crows, they undermined its foundations, and with
great pains they removed four of its stones. Then night came upon both
sides, and put an end to this struggle for the present; however, that
night the wall was so shaken by the battering rams in that place where
John had used his stratagem before, and had undermined their banks, that
the ground then gave way, and the wall fell down suddenly.

4. When this accident had unexpectedly happened, the minds of both
parties were variously affected; for though one would expect that
the Jews would be discouraged, because this fall of their wall was
unexpected by them, and they had made no provision in that case, yet
did they pull up their courage, because the tower of Antonia itself was
still standing; as was the unexpected joy of the Romans at this fall of
the wall soon quenched by the sight they had of another wall, which John
and his party had built within it. However, the attack of this second
wall appeared to be easier than that of the former, because it seemed
a thing of greater facility to get up to it through the parts of the
former wall that were now thrown down. This new wall appeared also to
be much weaker than the tower of Antonia, and accordingly the Romans
imagined that it had been erected so much on the sudden, that they
should soon overthrow it: yet did not any body venture now to go up to
this wall; for that such as first ventured so to do must certainly be
killed.

5. And now Titus, upon consideration that the alacrity of soldiers in
war is chiefly excited by hopes and by good words, and that exhortations
and promises do frequently make men to forget the hazards they run, nay,
sometimes to despise death itself, got together the most courageous part
of his army, and tried what he could do with his men by these methods.
"O fellow soldiers," said he, "to make an exhortation to men to do what
hath no peril in it, is on that very account inglorious to such to whom
that exhortation is made; and indeed so it is in him that makes the
exhortation, an argument of his own cowardice also. I therefore think
that such exhortations ought then only to be made use of when affairs
are in a dangerous condition, and yet are worthy of being attempted by
every one themselves; accordingly, I am fully of the same opinion with
you, that it is a difficult task to go up this wall; but that it is
proper for those that desire reputation for their valor to struggle with
difficulties in such cases as will then appear, when I have particularly
shown that it is a brave thing to die with glory, and that the courage
here necessary shall not go unrewarded in those that first begin the
attempt. And let my first argument to move you to it be taken from
what probably some would think reasonable to dissuade you, I mean the
constancy and patience of these Jews, even under their ill successes;
for it is unbecoming you, who are Romans and my soldiers, who have
in peace been taught how to make wars, and who have also been used to
conquer in those wars, to be inferior to Jews, either in action of the
hand, or in courage of the soul, and this especially when you are at the
conclusion of your victory, and are assisted by God himself; for as to
our misfortunes, they have been owing to the madness of the Jews, while
their sufferings have been owing to your valor, and to the assistance
God hath afforded you; for as to the seditions they have been in, and
the famine they are under, and the siege they now endure, and the
fall of their walls without our engines, what can they all be but
demonstrations of God's anger against them, and of his assistance
afforded us? It will not therefore be proper for you, either to show
yourselves inferior to those to whom you are really superior, or to
betray that Divine assistance which is afforded you. And, indeed, how
can it be esteemed otherwise than a base and unworthy thing, that while
the Jews, who need not be much ashamed if they be deserted, because they
have long learned to be slaves to others, do yet despise death, that
they may be so no longer; and do make sallies into the very midst of
us frequently, not in hopes of conquering us, but merely for a
demonstration of their courage; we, who have gotten possession of almost
all the world that belongs to either land or sea, to whom it will be a
great shame if we do not conquer them, do not once undertake any attempt
against our enemies wherein there is much danger, but sit still idle,
with such brave arms as we have, and only wait till the famine and
fortune do our business themselves, and this when we have it in our
power, with some small hazard, to gain all that we desire! For if we go
up to this tower of Antonia, we gain the city; for if there should be
any more occasion for fighting against those within the city, which I do
not suppose there will, since we shall then be upon the top of the
hill 1 and be upon our enemies before they can have taken breath, these
advantages promise us no less than a certain and sudden victory. As for
myself, I shall at present wave any commendation of those who die in
war, 2 and omit to speak of the immortality of those men who are slain
in the midst of their martial bravery; yet cannot I forbear to imprecate
upon those who are of a contrary disposition, that they may die in time
of peace, by some distemper or other, since their souls are condemned to
the grave, together with their bodies. For what man of virtue is there
who does not know, that those souls which are severed from their fleshly
bodies in battles by the sword are received by the ether, that purest of
elements, and joined to that company which are placed among the stars;
that they become good demons, and propitious heroes, and show themselves
as such to their posterity afterwards? while upon those souls that wear
away in and with their distempered bodies comes a subterranean night
to dissolve them to nothing, and a deep oblivion to take away all the
remembrance of them, and this notwithstanding they be clean from all
spots and defilements of this world; so that, in this ease, the soul at
the same time comes to the utmost bounds of its life, and of its body,
and of its memorial also. But since he hath determined that death is to
come of necessity upon all men, a sword is a better instrument for that
purpose than any disease whatsoever. Why is it not then a very mean
thing for us not to yield up that to the public benefit which we must
yield up to fate? And this discourse have I made, upon the supposition
that those who at first attempt to go upon this wall must needs be
killed in the attempt, though still men of true courage have a chance to
escape even in the most hazardous undertakings. For, in the first
place, that part of the former wall that is thrown down is easily to be
ascended; and for the new-built wall, it is easily destroyed. Do you,
therefore, many of you, pull up your courage, and set about this work,
and do you mutually encourage and assist one another; and this your
bravery will soon break the hearts of your enemies; and perhaps such a
glorious undertaking as yours is may be accomplished without bloodshed.
For although it be justly to be supposed that the Jews will try to
hinder you at your first beginning to go up to them; yet when you have
once concealed yourselves from them, and driven them away by force, they
will not be able to sustain your efforts against them any longer, though
but a few of you prevent them, and get over the wall. As for that person
who first mounts the wall, I should blush for shame if I did not make
him to be envied of others, by those rewards I would bestow upon him.
If such a one escape with his life, he shall have the command of others
that are now but his equals; although it be true also that the greatest
rewards will accrue to such as die in the attempt." 3

6. Upon this speech of Titus, the rest of the multitude were afrighted
at so great a danger. But there was one, whose name was Sabinus, a
soldier that served among the cohorts, and a Syrian by birth, who
appeared to be of very great fortitude, both in the actions he had done,
and the courage of his soul he had shown; although any body would
have thought, before he came to his work, that he was of such a weak
constitution of body, that he was not fit to be a soldier; for his color
was black, his flesh was lean and thin, and lay close together; but
there was a certain heroic soul that dwelt in this small body, which
body was indeed much too narrow for that peculiar courage which was in
him. Accordingly he was the first that rose up, when he thus spake: "I
readily surrender up myself to thee, O Caesar; I first ascend the
wall, and I heartily wish that my fortune may follow my courage and
my resolution And if some ill fortune grudge me the success of my
undertaking, take notice that my ill success will not be unexpected, but
that I choose death voluntarily for thy sake." When he had said this,
and had spread out his shield over his head with his left hand, and had,
with his right hand, drawn his sword, he marched up to the wall, just
about the sixth hour of the day. There followed him eleven others, and
no more, that resolved to imitate his bravery; but still this was the
principal person of them all, and went first, as excited by a divine
fury. Now those that guarded the wall shot at them from thence, and cast
innumerable darts upon them from every side; they also rolled very large
stones upon them, which overthrew some of those eleven that were with
him. But as for Sabinus himself, he met the darts that were cast at him
and though he was overwhelmed with them, yet did he not leave off the
violence of his attack before he had gotten up on the top of the wall,
and had put the enemy to flight. For as the Jews were astonished at
his great strength, and the bravery of his soul, and as, withal, they
imagined more of them had got upon the wall than really had, they were
put to flight. And now one cannot but complain here of fortune, as still
envious at virtue, and always hindering the performance of glorious
achievements: this was the case of the man before us, when he had just
obtained his purpose; for he then stumbled at a certain large stone, and
fell down upon it headlong, with a very great noise. Upon which the Jews
turned back, and when they saw him to be alone, and fallen down also,
they threw darts at him from every side. However, he got upon his knee,
and covered himself with his shield, and at the first defended himself
against them, and wounded many of those that came near him; but he was
soon forced to relax his right hand, by the multitude of the wounds that
had been given him, till at length he was quite covered over with darts
before he gave up the ghost. He was one who deserved a better fate, by
reason of his bravery; but, as might be expected, he fell under so vast
an attempt. As for the rest of his partners, the Jews dashed three of
them to pieces with stones, and slew them as they were gotten up to the
top of the wall; the other eight being wounded, were pulled down, and
carried back to the camp. These things were done upon the third day of
the month Panemus [Tamuz].

7. Now two days afterward twelve of those men that were on the
forefront, and kept watch upon the banks, got together, and called to
them the standard-bearer of the fifth legion, and two others of a troop
of horsemen, and one trumpeter; these went without noise, about the
ninth hour of the night, through the ruins, to the tower of Antonia; and
when they had cut the throats of the first guards of the place, as they
were asleep, they got possession of the wall, and ordered the trumpeter
to sound his trumpet. Upon which the rest of the guard got up on the
sudden, and ran away, before any body could see how many they were that
were gotten up; for, partly from the fear they were in, and partly from
the sound of the trumpet which they heard, they imagined a great number
of the enemy were gotten up. But as soon as Caesar heard the signal,
he ordered the army to put on their armor immediately, and came thither
with his commanders, and first of all ascended, as did the chosen men
that were with him. And as the Jews were flying away to the temple, they
fell into that mine which John had dug under the Roman banks. Then
did the seditious of both the bodies of the Jewish army, as well that
belonging to John as that belonging to Simon, drive them away; and
indeed were no way wanting as to the highest degree of force and
alacrity; for they esteemed themselves entirely ruined if once the
Romans got into the temple, as did the Romans look upon the same thing
as the beginning of their entire conquest. So a terrible battle was
fought at the entrance of the temple, while the Romans were forcing
their way, in order to get possession of that temple, and the Jews were
driving them back to the tower of Antonia; in which battle the darts
were on both sides useless, as well as the spears, and both sides drew
their swords, and fought it out hand to hand. Now during this struggle
the positions of the men were undistinguished on both sides, and
they fought at random, the men being intermixed one with another, and
confounded, by reason of the narrowness of the place; while the noise
that was made fell on the ear after an indistinct manner, because it
was so very loud. Great slaughter was now made on both sides, and the
combatants trod upon the bodies and the armor of those that were dead,
and dashed them to pieces. Accordingly, to which side soever the battle
inclined, those that had the advantage exhorted one another to go on, as
did those that were beaten make great lamentation. But still there was
no room for flight, nor for pursuit, but disorderly revolutions and
retreats, while the armies were intermixed one with another; but those
that were in the first ranks were under the necessity of killing or
being killed, without any way for escaping; for those on both sides that
came behind forced those before them to go on, without leaving any space
between the armies. At length the Jews' violent zeal was too hard for
the Romans' skill, and the battle already inclined entirely that way;
for the fight had lasted from the ninth hour of the night till the
seventh hour of the day, While the Jews came on in crowds, and had the
danger the temple was in for their motive; the Romans having no more
here than a part of their army; for those legions, on which the soldiers
on that side depended, were not come up to them. So it was at present
thought sufficient by the Romans to take possession of the tower of
Antonia.

8. But there was one Julian, a centurion, that came from Bithynia, a man
he was of great reputation, whom I had formerly seen in that war, and
one of the highest fame, both for his skill in war, his strength of
body, and the courage of his soul. This man, seeing the Romans giving
ground, and in a sad condition, [for he stood by Titus at the tower of
Antonia,] leaped out, and of himself alone put the Jews to flight, when
they were already conquerors, and made them retire as far as the corner
of the inner court of the temple; from him the multitude fled away in
crowds, as supposing that neither his strength nor his violent attacks
could be those of a mere man. Accordingly, he rushed through the midst
of the Jews, as they were dispersed all abroad, and killed those that he
caught. Nor, indeed, was there any sight that appeared more wonderful in
the eyes of Caesar, or more terrible to others, than this. However, he
was himself pursued by fate, which it was not possible that he, who was
but a mortal man, should escape; for as he had shoes all full of thick
and sharp nails 4 as had every one of the other soldiers, so when he ran
on the pavement of the temple, he slipped, and fell down upon his back
with a very great noise, which was made by his armor. This made those
that were running away to turn back; whereupon those Romans that were in
the tower of Antonia set up a great shout, as they were in fear for the
man. But the Jews got about him in crowds, and struck at him with their
spears and with their swords on all sides. Now he received a great
many of the strokes of these iron weapons upon his shield, and often
attempted to get up again, but was thrown down by those that struck at
him; yet did he, as he lay along, stab many of them with his sword. Nor
was he soon killed, as being covered with his helmet and his breastplate
in all those parts of his body where he might be mortally wounded; he
also pulled his neck close to his body, till all his other limbs were
shattered, and nobody durst come to defend him, and then he yielded to
his fate. Now Caesar was deeply affected on account of this man of so
great fortitude, and especially as he was killed in the sight of so many
people; he was desirous himself to come to his assistance, but the place
would not give him leave, while such as could have done it were too much
terrified to attempt it. Thus when Julian had struggled with death a
great while, and had let but few of those that had given him his mortal
wound go off unhurt, he had at last his throat cut, though not without
some difficulty, and left behind him a very great fame, not only among
the Romans, and with Caesar himself, but among his enemies also; then
did the Jews catch up his dead body, and put the Romans to flight again,
and shut them up in the tower of Antonia. Now those that most signalized
themselves, and fought most zealously in this battle of the Jewish side,
were one Alexas and Gyphtheus, of John's party, and of Simon's party
were Malachias, and Judas the son of Merto, and James the son of Sosas,
the commander of the Idumeans; and of the zealots, two brethren, Simon
and Judas, the sons of Jairus.






CHAPTER 2.


     How Titus Gave Orders To Demolish The Tower Of Antonia And
     Then Persuaded Josephus To Exhort The Jews Again [To A
     Surrender].

1. And now Titus gave orders to his soldiers that were with him to dig
up the foundations of the tower of Antonia, and make him a ready passage
for his army to come up; while he himself had Josephus brought to
him, [for he had been informed that on that very day, which was the
seventeenth day 5of Panemus, [Tamuz,] the sacrifice called "the Daily
Sacrifice" had failed, and had not been offered to God, for want of men
to offer it, and that the people were grievously troubled at it,] and
commanded him to say the same things to John that he had said before,
that if he had any malicious inclination for fighting, he might come out
with as many of his men as he pleased, in order to fight, without the
danger of destroying either his city or temple; but that he desired he
would not defile the temple, nor thereby offend against God. That he
might, if he pleased, offer the sacrifices which were now discontinued
by any of the Jews whom he should pitch upon. Upon this Josephus stood
in such a place where he might be heard, not by John only, but by many
more, and then declared to them what Caesar had given him in charge,
and this in the Hebrew language. 6 So he earnestly prayed them to spare
their own city, and to prevent that fire which was just ready to seize
upon the temple, and to offer their usual sacrifices to God therein. At
these words of his a great sadness and silence were observed among the
people. But the tyrant himself cast many reproaches upon Josephus, with
imprecations besides; and at last added this withal, that he did never
fear the taking of the city, because it was God's own city. In answer to
which Josephus said thus with a loud voice: "To be sure thou hast kept
this city wonderfully pure for God's sake; the temple also continues
entirely unpolluted! Nor hast thou been guilty of any impiety against
him for whose assistance thou hopest! He still receives his accustomed
sacrifices! Vile wretch that thou art! if any one should deprive thee of
thy daily food, thou wouldst esteem him to be an enemy to thee; but thou
hopest to have that God for thy supporter in this war whom thou hast
deprived of his everlasting worship; and thou imputest those sins to the
Romans, who to this very time take care to have our laws observed, and
almost compel these sacrifices to be still offered to God, which have
by thy means been intermitted! Who is there that can avoid groans and
lamentations at the amazing change that is made in this city? since
very foreigners and enemies do now correct that impiety which thou hast
occasioned; while thou, who art a Jew, and wast educated in our laws,
art become a greater enemy to them than the others. But still, John, it
is never dishonorable to repent, and amend what hath been done amiss,
even at the last extremity. Thou hast an instance before thee in
Jechoniah, 7 the king of the Jews, if thou hast a mind to save the
city, who, when the king of Babylon made war against him, did of his
own accord go out of this city before it was taken, and did undergo a
voluntary captivity with his family, that the sanctuary might not be
delivered up to the enemy, and that he might not see the house of God
set on fire; on which account he is celebrated among all the Jews, in
their sacred memorials, and his memory is become immortal, and will be
conveyed fresh down to our posterity through all ages. This, John, is
an excellent example in such a time of danger, and I dare venture to
promise that the Romans shall still forgive thee. And take notice that
I, who make this exhortation to thee, am one of thine own nation; I,
who am a Jew, do make this promise to thee. And it will become thee to
consider who I am that give thee this counsel, and whence I am derived;
for while I am alive I shall never be in such slavery, as to forego
my own kindred, or forget the laws of our forefathers. Thou hast
indignation at me again, and makest a clamor at me, and reproachest me;
indeed I cannot deny but I am worthy of worse treatment than all this
amounts to, because, in opposition to fate, I make this kind invitation
to thee, and endeavor to force deliverance upon those whom God hath
condemned. And who is there that does not know what the writings of the
ancient prophets contain in them,--and particularly that oracle which
is just now going to be fulfilled upon this miserable city? For they
foretold that this city should be then taken when somebody shall begin
the slaughter of his own countrymen. And are not both the city and the
entire temple now full of the dead bodies of your countrymen? It is God,
therefore, it is God himself who is bringing on this fire, to purge that
city and temple by means of the Romans, 8 and is going to pluck up this
city, which is full of your pollutions."

2. As Josephus spoke these words, with groans and tears in his eyes, his
voice was intercepted by sobs. However, the Romans could not but pity
the affliction he was under, and wonder at his conduct. But for John,
and those that were with him, they were but the more exasperated against
the Romans on this account, and were desirous to get Josephus also into
their power: yet did that discourse influence a great many of the better
sort; and truly some of them were so afraid of the guards set by the
seditious, that they tarried where they were, but still were satisfied
that both they and the city were doomed to destruction. Some also there
were who, watching a proper opportunity when they might quietly get
away, fled to the Romans, of whom were the high priests Joseph and
Jesus, and of the sons of high priests three, whose father was Ishmael,
who was beheaded in Cyrene, and four sons of Matthias, as also one son
of the other Matthias, who ran away after his father's death, 9 and
whose father was slain by Simon the son of Gioras, with three of his
sons, as I have already related; many also of the other nobility went
over to the Romans, together with the high priests. Now Caesar not only
received these men very kindly in other respects, but, knowing they
would not willingly live after the customs of other nations, he sent
them to Gophna, and desired them to remain there for the present, and
told them, that when he was gotten clear of this war, he would restore
each of them to their possessions again; so they cheerfully retired to
that small city which was allotted them, without fear of any danger.
But as they did not appear, the seditious gave out again that these
deserters were slain by the Romans, which was done in order to deter
the rest from running away, by fear of the like treatment. This trick of
theirs succeeded now for a while, as did the like trick before; for the
rest were hereby deterred from deserting, by fear of the like treatment.

3. However, when Titus had recalled those men from Gophna, he gave
orders that they should go round the wall, together with Josephus,
and show themselves to the people; upon which a great many fled to the
Romans. These men also got in a great number together, and stood before
the Romans, and besought the seditious, with groans and tears in their
eyes, in the first place to receive the Romans entirely into the city,
and save that their own place of residence again; but that, if they
would not agree to such a proposal, they would at least depart out of
the temple, and save the holy house for their own use; for that the
Romans would not venture to set the sanctuary on fire but under the most
pressing necessity. Yet did the seditious still more and more contradict
them; and while they cast loud and bitter reproaches upon these
deserters, they also set their engines for throwing of darts, and
javelins, and stones upon the sacred gates of the temple, at due
distances from one another, insomuch that all the space round about
within the temple might be compared to a burying-ground, so great was
the number of the dead bodies therein; as might the holy house itself
be compared to a citadel. Accordingly, these men rushed upon these holy
places in their armor, that were otherwise unapproachable, and that
while their hands were yet warm with the blood of their own people which
they had shed; nay, they proceeded to such great transgressions, that
the very same indignation which Jews would naturally have against
Romans, had they been guilty of such abuses against them, the Romans
now had against Jews, for their impiety in regard to their own religious
customs. Nay, indeed, there were none of the Roman soldiers who did not
look with a sacred horror upon the holy house, and adored it, and wished
that the robbers would repent before their miseries became incurable.

4. Now Titus was deeply affected with this state of things, and
reproached John and his party, and said to them, "Have not you, vile
wretches that you are, by our permission, put up this partition-wall
before your sanctuary? Have not you been allowed to put up the pillars
thereto belonging, at due distances, and on it to engrave in Greek,
and in your own letters, this prohibition, that no foreigner should
go beyond that wall. 10 Have not we given you leave to kill such as
go beyond it, though he were a Roman? And what do you do now, you
pernicious villains? Why do you trample upon dead bodies in this temple?
and why do you pollute this holy house with the blood of both foreigners
and Jews themselves? I appeal to the gods of my own country, and to
every god that ever had any regard to this place; [for I do not suppose
it to be now regarded by any of them;] I also appeal to my own army, and
to those Jews that are now with me, and even to yourselves, that I do
not force you to defile this your sanctuary; and if you will but change
the place whereon you will fight, no Roman shall either come near your
sanctuary, or offer any affront to it; nay, I will endeavor to preserve
you your holy house, whether you will or not." 11

5. As Josephus explained these things from the mouth of Caesar, both the
robbers and the tyrant thought that these exhortations proceeded from
Titus's fear, and not from his good-will to them, and grew insolent
upon it. But when Titus saw that these men were neither to be moved by
commiseration towards themselves, nor had any concern upon them to have
the holy house spared, he proceeded unwillingly to go on again with the
war against them. He could not indeed bring all his army against them,
the place was so narrow; but choosing thirty soldiers of the most
valiant out of every hundred, and committing a thousand to each tribune,
and making Cerealis their commander-in-chief, he gave orders that they
should attack the guards of the temple about the ninth hour of that
night. But as he was now in his armor, and preparing to go down with
them, his friends would not let him go, by reason of the greatness of
the danger, and what the commanders suggested to them; for they said
that he would do more by sitting above in the tower of Antonia, as a
dispenser of rewards to those soldiers that signalized themselves in the
fight, than by coming down and hazarding his own person in the forefront
of them; for that they would all fight stoutly while Caesar looked upon
them. With this advice Caesar complied, and said that the only reason
he had for such compliance with the soldiers was this, that he might be
able to judge of their courageous actions, and that no valiant soldier
might lie concealed, and miss of his reward, and no cowardly soldier
might go unpunished; but that he might himself be an eye-witness, and
able to give evidence of all that was done, who was to be the disposer
of punishments and rewards to them. So he sent the soldiers about their
work at the hour forementioned, while he went out himself to a higher
place in the tower of Antonia, whence he might see what was done, and
there waited with impatience to see the event.

6. However, the soldiers that were sent did not find the guards of the
temple asleep, as they hoped to have done; but were obliged to fight
with them immediately hand to hand, as they rushed with violence upon
them with a great shout. Now as soon as the rest within the temple heard
that shout of those that were upon the watch, they ran out in troops
upon them. Then did the Romans receive the onset of those that came
first upon them; but those that followed them fell upon their own
troops, and many of them treated their own soldiers as if they had
been enemies; for the great confused noise that was made on both sides
hindered them from distinguishing one another's voices, as did the
darkness of the night hinder them from the like distinction by the
sight, besides that blindness which arose otherwise also from the
passion and the fear they were in at the same time; for which reason
it was all one to the soldiers who it was they struck at. However, this
ignorance did less harm to the Romans than to the Jews, because they
were joined together under their shields, and made their sallies
more regularly than the others did, and each of them remembered their
watch-word; while the Jews were perpetually dispersed abroad, and made
their attacks and retreats at random, and so did frequently seem to one
another to be enemies; for every one of them received those of their own
men that came back in the dark as Romans, and made an assault upon them;
so that more of them were wounded by their own men than by the enemy,
till, upon the coming on of the day, the nature of the right was
discerned by the eye afterward. Then did they stand in battle-array in
distinct bodies, and cast their darts regularly, and regularly defended
themselves; nor did either side yield or grow weary. The Romans
contended with each other who should fight the most strenuously, both
single men and entire regiments, as being under the eye of Titus; and
every one concluded that this day would begin his promotion if he
fought bravely. What were the great encouragements of the Jews to act
vigorously were, their fear for themselves and for the temple, and the
presence of their tyrant, who exhorted some, and beat and threatened
others, to act courageously. Now, it so happened, that this fight was
for the most part a stationary one, wherein the soldiers went on and
came back in a short time, and suddenly; for there was no long space of
ground for either of their flights or pursuits. But still there was a
tumultuous noise among the Romans from the tower of Antonia, who loudly
cried out upon all occasions to their own men to press on courageously,
when they were too hard for the Jews, and to stay when they were
retiring backward; so that here was a kind of theater of war; for what
was done in this fight could not be concealed either from Titus, or from
those that were about him. At length it appeared that this fight, which
began at the ninth hour of the night, was not over till past the fifth
hour of the day; and that, in the same place where the battle began,
neither party could say they had made the other to retire; but both
the armies left the victory almost in uncertainty between them; wherein
those that signalized themselves on the Roman side were a great many,
but on the Jewish side, and of those that were with Simon, Judas the son
of Merto, and Simon the son of Josas; of the Idumeans, James and Simon,
the latter of whom was the son of Cathlas, and James was the son of
Sosas; of those that were with John, Gyphtheus and Alexas; and of the
zealots, Simon the son of Jairus.

7. In the mean time, the rest of the Roman army had, in seven days'
time, overthrown [some] foundations of the tower of Antonia, and had
made a ready and broad way to the temple. Then did the legions come near
the first court, 12 and began to raise their banks. The one bank was
over against the north-west corner of the inner temple 13 another was at
that northern edifice which was between the two gates; and of the other
two, one was at the western cloister of the outer court of the temple;
the other against its northern cloister. However, these works were thus
far advanced by the Romans, not without great pains and difficulty, and
particularly by being obliged to bring their materials from the distance
of a hundred furlongs. They had further difficulties also upon them;
sometimes by their over-great security they were in that they should
overcome the Jewish snares laid for them, and by that boldness of the
Jews which their despair of escaping had inspired them withal; for some
of their horsemen, when they went out to gather wood or hay, let their
horses feed without having their bridles on during the time of foraging;
upon which horses the Jews sallied out in whole bodies, and seized them.
And when this was continually done, and Caesar believed what the truth
was, that the horses were stolen more by the negligence of his own men
than by the valor of the Jews, he determined to use greater severity to
oblige the rest to take care of their horses; so he commanded that
one of those soldiers who had lost their horses should be capitally
punished; whereby he so terrified the rest, that they preserved their
horses for the time to come; for they did not any longer let them go
from them to feed by themselves, but, as if they had grown to them, they
went always along with them when they wanted necessaries. Thus did the
Romans still continue to make war against the temple, and to raise their
banks against it.

8. Now after one day had been interposed since the Romans ascended the
breach, many of the seditious were so pressed by the famine, upon the
present failure of their ravages, that they got together, and made an
attack on those Roman guards that were upon the Mount of Olives, and
this about the eleventh hour of the day, as supposing, first, that they
would not expect such an onset, and, in the next place, that they were
then taking care of their bodies, and that therefore they should easily
beat them. But the Romans were apprized of their coming to attack them
beforehand, and, running together from the neighboring camps on the
sudden, prevented them from getting over their fortification, or forcing
the wall that was built about them. Upon this came on a sharp fight, and
here many great actions were performed on both sides; while the Romans
showed both their courage and their skill in war, as did the Jews come
on them with immoderate violence and intolerable passion. The one part
were urged on by shame, and the other by necessity; for it seemed a very
shameful thing to the Romans to let the Jews go, now they were taken in
a kind of net; while the Jews had but one hope of saving themselves, and
that was in case they could by violence break through the Roman wall;
and one whose name was Pedanius, belonging to a party of horsemen, when
the Jews were already beaten and forced down into the valley together,
spurred his horse on their flank with great vehemence, and caught up a
certain young man belonging to the enemy by his ankle, as he was running
away; the man was, however, of a robust body, and in his armor; so
low did Pedanius bend himself downward from his horse, even as he was
galloping away, and so great was the strength of his right hand, and of
the rest of his body, as also such skill had he in horsemanship. So this
man seized upon that his prey, as upon a precious treasure, and carried
him as his captive to Caesar; whereupon Titus admired the man that had
seized the other for his great strength, and ordered the man that was
caught to be punished [with death] for his attempt against the Roman
wall, but betook himself to the siege of the temple, and to pressing on
the raising of the banks.

9. In the mean time, the Jews were so distressed by the fights they had
been in, as the war advanced higher and higher, and creeping up to the
holy house itself, that they, as it were, cut off those limbs of their
body which were infected, in order to prevent the distemper's spreading
further; for they set the north-west cloister, which was joined to the
tower of Antonia, on fire, and after that brake off about twenty cubits
of that cloister, and thereby made a beginning in burning the sanctuary;
two days after which, or on the twenty-fourth day of the forenamed
month, [Panemus or Tamuz,] the Romans set fire to the cloister that
joined to the other, when the fire went fifteen cubits farther. The
Jews, in like manner, cut off its roof; nor did they entirely leave
off what they were about till the tower of Antonia was parted from the
temple, even when it was in their power to have stopped the fire; nay,
they lay still while the temple was first set on fire, and deemed this
spreading of the fire to be for their own advantage. However, the armies
were still fighting one against another about the temple, and the war
was managed by continual sallies of particular parties against one
another.

10. Now there was at this time a man among the Jews, low of stature he
was, and of a despicable appearance; of no character either as to his
family, or in other respects: his name was Jonathan. He went out at the
high priest John's monument, and uttered many other insolent things to
the Romans, and challenged the best of them all to a single combat. But
many of those that stood there in the army huffed him, and many of them
[as they might well be] were afraid of him. Some of them also reasoned
thus, and that justly enough: that it was not fit to fight with a man
that desired to die, because those that utterly despaired of deliverance
had, besides other passions, a violence in attacking men that could not
be opposed, and had no regard to God himself; and that to hazard oneself
with a person, whom, if you overcome, you do no great matter, and
by whom it is hazardous that you may be taken prisoner, would be an
instance, not of manly courage, but of unmanly rashness. So there being
nobody that came out to accept the man's challenge, and the Jew cutting
them with a great number of reproaches, as cowards, [for he was a very
haughty man in himself, and a great despiser of the Romans,] one whose
name was Pudens, of the body of horsemen, out of his abomination of
the other's words, and of his impudence withal, and perhaps out of an
inconsiderate arrogance, on account of the other's lowness of stature,
ran out to him, and was too hard for him in other respects, but was
betrayed by his ill fortune; for he fell down, and as he was down,
Jonathan came running to him, and cut his throat, and then, standing
upon his dead body, he brandished his sword, bloody as it was, and shook
his shield with his left hand, and made many acclamations to the Roman
army, and exulted over the dead man, and jested upon the Romans; till
at length one Priscus, a centurion, shot a dart at him as he was leaping
and playing the fool with himself, and thereby pierced him through;
upon which a shout was set up both by the Jews and the Romans, though
on different accounts. So Jonathan grew giddy by the pain of his wounds,
and fell down upon the body of his adversary, as a plain instance how
suddenly vengeance may come upon men that have success in war, without
any just deserving the same.






CHAPTER 3.


     Concerning A Stratagem That Was Devised By The Jews, By
     Which They Burnt Many Of The Romans; With Another
     Description Of The Terrible Famine That Was In The City.

1. But now the seditious that were in the temple did every day openly
endeavor to beat off the soldiers that were upon the banks, and on the
twenty-seventh day of the forenamed month [Panemus or Tamuz] contrived
such a stratagem as this: They filled that part of the western cloister
14 which was between the beams, and the roof under them, with dry
materials, as also with bitumen and pitch, and then retired from that
place, as though they were tired with the pains they had taken; at which
procedure of theirs, many of the most inconsiderate among the Romans,
who were carried away with violent passions, followed hard after them as
they were retiring, and applied ladders to the cloister, and got up to
it suddenly; but the prudent part of them, when they understood this
unaccountable retreat of the Jews, stood still where they were before.
However, the cloister was full of those that were gone up the ladders;
at which time the Jews set it all on fire; and as the flame burst out
every where on the sudden, the Romans that were out of the danger were
seized with a very great consternation, as were those that were in
the midst of the danger in the utmost distress. So when they perceived
themselves surrounded with the flames, some of them threw themselves
down backwards into the city, and some among their enemies [in the
temple]; as did many leap down to their own men, and broke their limbs
to pieces; but a great number of those that were going to take these
violent methods were prevented by the fire; though some prevented the
fire by their own swords. However, the fire was on the sudden carried
so far as to surround those who would have otherwise perished. As for
Caesar himself, he could not, however, but commiserate those that thus
perished, although they got up thither without any order for so doing,
since there was no way of giving the many relief. Yet was this some
comfort to those that were destroyed, that every body might see that
person grieve, for whose sake they came to their end; for he cried out
openly to them, and leaped up, and exhorted those that were about him to
do their utmost to relieve them; So every one of them died cheerfully,
as carrying along with him these words and this intention of Caesar as a
sepulchral monument. Some there were indeed who retired into the wall of
the cloister, which was broad, and were preserved out of the fire, but
were then surrounded by the Jews; and although they made resistance
against the Jews for a long time, yet were they wounded by them, and at
length they all fell down dead.

2. At the last a young man among them, whose name was Longus, became a
decoration to this sad affair, and while every one of them that perished
were worthy of a memorial, this man appeared to deserve it beyond
all the rest. Now the Jews admired this man for his courage, and were
further desirous of having him slain; so they persuaded him to come down
to them, upon security given him for his life. But Cornelius his brother
persuaded him on the contrary, not to tarnish his own glory, nor that
of the Roman army. He complied with this last advice, and lifting up his
sword before both armies, he slew himself. Yet there was one Artorius
among those surrounded by the fire who escaped by his subtlety; for
when he had with a loud voice called to him Lucius, one of his fellow
soldiers that lay with him in the same tent, and said to him, "I do
leave thee heir of all I have, if thou wilt come and receive me." Upon
this he came running to receive him readily; Artorius then threw himself
down upon him, and saved his own life, while he that received him was
dashed so vehemently against the stone pavement by the other's weight,
that he died immediately. This melancholy accident made the Romans
sad for a while, but still it made them more upon their guard for the
future, and was of advantage to them against the delusions of the Jews,
by which they were greatly damaged through their unacquaintedness with
the places, and with the nature of the inhabitants. Now this cloister
was burnt down as far as John's tower, which he built in the war he made
against Simon over the gates that led to the Xystus. The Jews also cut
off the rest of that cloister from the temple, after they had destroyed
those that got up to it. But the next day the Romans burnt down the
northern cloister entirely, as far as the east cloister, whose common
angle joined to the valley that was called Cedron, and was built over
it; on which account the depth was frightful. And this was the state of
the temple at that time.

3. Now of those that perished by famine in the city, the number was
prodigious, and the miseries they underwent were unspeakable; for if so
much as the shadow of any kind of food did any where appear, a war was
commenced presently, and the dearest friends fell a fighting one with
another about it, snatching from each other the most miserable supports
of life. Nor would men believe that those who were dying had no food,
but the robbers would search them when they were expiring, lest any one
should have concealed food in their bosoms, and counterfeited dying;
nay, these robbers gaped for want, and ran about stumbling and
staggering along like mad dogs, and reeling against the doors of the
houses like drunken men; they would also, in the great distress they
were in, rush into the very same houses two or three times in one and
the same day. Moreover, their hunger was so intolerable, that it obliged
them to chew every thing, while they gathered such things as the most
sordid animals would not touch, and endured to eat them; nor did they
at length abstain from girdles and shoes; and the very leather which
belonged to their shields they pulled off and gnawed: the very wisps
of old hay became food to some; and some gathered up fibres, and sold
a very small weight of them for four Attic [drachmae]. But why do I
describe the shameless impudence that the famine brought on men in their
eating inanimate things, while I am going to relate a matter of fact,
the like to which no history relates, 15 either among the Greeks or
Barbarians? It is horrible to speak of it, and incredible when heard.
I had indeed willingly omitted this calamity of ours, that I might not
seem to deliver what is so portentous to posterity, but that I have
innumerable witnesses to it in my own age; and besides, my country would
have had little reason to thank me for suppressing the miseries that she
underwent at this time.

4. There was a certain woman that dwelt beyond Jordan, her name was
Mary; her father was Eleazar, of the village Bethezob, which signifies
the house of Hyssop. She was eminent for her family and her wealth, and
had fled away to Jerusalem with the rest of the multitude, and was with
them besieged therein at this time. The other effects of this woman had
been already seized upon, such I mean as she had brought with her out
of Perea, and removed to the city. What she had treasured up besides, as
also what food she had contrived to save, had been also carried off by
the rapacious guards, who came every day running into her house for that
purpose. This put the poor woman into a very great passion, and by
the frequent reproaches and imprecations she cast at these rapacious
villains, she had provoked them to anger against her; but none of them,
either out of the indignation she had raised against herself, or out of
commiseration of her case, would take away her life; and if she found
any food, she perceived her labors were for others, and not for herself;
and it was now become impossible for her any way to find any more food,
while the famine pierced through her very bowels and marrow, when also
her passion was fired to a degree beyond the famine itself; nor did she
consult with any thing but with her passion and the necessity she was
in. She then attempted a most unnatural thing; and snatching up her
son, who was a child sucking at her breast, she said, "O thou miserable
infant! for whom shall I preserve thee in this war, this famine, and
this sedition? As to the war with the Romans, if they preserve our
lives, we must be slaves. This famine also will destroy us, even before
that slavery comes upon us. Yet are these seditious rogues more terrible
than both the other. Come on; be thou my food, and be thou a fury to
these seditious varlets, and a by-word to the world, which is all that
is now wanting to complete the calamities of us Jews." As soon as she
had said this, she slew her son, and then roasted him, and eat the one
half of him, and kept the other half by her concealed. Upon this the
seditious came in presently, and smelling the horrid scent of this food,
they threatened her that they would cut her throat immediately if she
did not show them what food she had gotten ready. She replied that she
had saved a very fine portion of it for them, and withal uncovered
what was left of her son. Hereupon they were seized with a horror and
amazement of mind, and stood astonished at the sight, when she said to
them, "This is mine own son, and what hath been done was mine own
doing! Come, eat of this food; for I have eaten of it myself! Do not
you pretend to be either more tender than a woman, or more compassionate
than a mother; but if you be so scrupulous, and do abominate this my
sacrifice, as I have eaten the one half, let the rest be reserved for
me also." After which those men went out trembling, being never so much
affrighted at any thing as they were at this, and with some difficulty
they left the rest of that meat to the mother. Upon which the whole city
was full of this horrid action immediately; and while every body laid
this miserable case before their own eyes, they trembled, as if this
unheard of action had been done by themselves. So those that were thus
distressed by the famine were very desirous to die, and those already
dead were esteemed happy, because they had not lived long enough either
to hear or to see such miseries.

5. This sad instance was quickly told to the Romans, some of whom could
not believe it, and others pitied the distress which the Jews were
under; but there were many of them who were hereby induced to a more
bitter hatred than ordinary against our nation. But for Caesar, he
excused himself before God as to this matter, and said that he had
proposed peace and liberty to the Jews, as well as an oblivion of all
their former insolent practices; but that they, instead of concord,
had chosen sedition; instead of peace, war; and before satiety and
abundance, a famine. That they had begun with their own hands to burn
down that temple which we have preserved hitherto; and that therefore
they deserved to eat such food as this was. That, however, this horrid
action of eating an own child ought to be covered with the overthrow of
their very country itself, and men ought not to leave such a city upon
the habitable earth to be seen by the sun, wherein mothers are thus fed,
although such food be fitter for the fathers than for the mothers to eat
of, since it is they that continue still in a state of war against us,
after they have undergone such miseries as these. And at the same time
that he said this, he reflected on the desperate condition these men
must be in; nor could he expect that such men could be recovered to
sobriety of mind, after they had endured those very sufferings, for the
avoiding whereof it only was probable they might have repented.






CHAPTER 4.


     When The Banks Were Completed And The Battering Rams
     Brought, And Could Do Nothing, Titus Gave Orders To Set Fire
     To The Gates Of The Temple; In No Long Time After Which The
     Holy House Itself Was Burnt Down, Even Against His Consent.

1. And now two of the legions had completed their banks on the eighth
day of the month Lous [Ab]. Whereupon Titus gave orders that the
battering rams should be brought, and set over against the western
edifice of the inner temple; for before these were brought, the firmest
of all the other engines had battered the wall for six days together
without ceasing, without making any impression upon it; but the vast
largeness and strong connexion of the stones were superior to that
engine, and to the other battering rams also. Other Romans did indeed
undermine the foundations of the northern gate, and after a world of
pains removed the outermost stones, yet was the gate still upheld by the
inner stones, and stood still unhurt; till the workmen, despairing of
all such attempts by engines and crows, brought their ladders to the
cloisters. Now the Jews did not interrupt them in so doing; but when
they were gotten up, they fell upon them, and fought with them; some of
them they thrust down, and threw them backwards headlong; others of
them they met and slew; they also beat many of those that went down the
ladders again, and slew them with their swords before they could bring
their shields to protect them; nay, some of the ladders they threw down
from above when they were full of armed men; a great slaughter was made
of the Jews also at the same time, while those that bare the ensigns
fought hard for them, as deeming it a terrible thing, and what would
tend to their great shame, if they permitted them to be stolen away. Yet
did the Jews at length get possession of these engines, and destroyed
those that had gone up the ladders, while the rest were so intimidated
by what those suffered who were slain, that they retired; although none
of the Romans died without having done good service before his death. Of
the seditious, those that had fought bravely in the former battles did
the like now, as besides them did Eleazar, the brother's son of Simon
the tyrant. But when Titus perceived that his endeavors to spare a
foreign temple turned to the damage of his soldiers, and then be killed,
he gave order to set the gates on fire.

2. In the mean time, there deserted to him Ananus, who came from
Emmaus, the most bloody of all Simon's guards, and Archelaus, the son of
Magadatus, they hoping to be still forgiven, because they left the Jews
at a time when they were the conquerors. Titus objected this to these
men, as a cunning trick of theirs; and as he had been informed of their
other barbarities towards the Jews, he was going in all haste to
have them both slain. He told them that they were only driven to this
desertion because of the utmost distress they were in, and did not come
away of their own good disposition; and that those did not deserve to be
preserved, by whom their own city was already set on fire, out of which
fire they now hurried themselves away. However, the security he had
promised deserters overcame his resentments, and he dismissed them
accordingly, though he did not give them the same privileges that he
had afforded to others. And now the soldiers had already put fire to the
gates, and the silver that was over them quickly carried the flames to
the wood that was within it, whence it spread itself all on the sudden,
and caught hold on the cloisters. Upon the Jews seeing this fire all
about them, their spirits sunk together with their bodies, and they were
under such astonishment, that not one of them made any haste, either to
defend himself or to quench the fire, but they stood as mute spectators
of it only. However, they did not so grieve at the loss of what was now
burning, as to grow wiser thereby for the time to come; but as though
the holy house itself had been on fire already, they whetted their
passions against the Romans. This fire prevailed during that day and the
next also; for the soldiers were not able to burn all the cloisters that
were round about together at one time, but only by pieces.

3. But then, on the next day, Titus commanded part of his army to
quench the fire, and to make a road for the more easy marching up of
the legions, while he himself gathered the commanders together. Of those
there were assembled the six principal persons: Tiberius Alexander, the
commander [under the general] of the whole army; with Sextus Cerealis,
the commander of the fifth legion; and Larcius Lepidus, the commander
of the tenth legion; and Titus Frigius, the commander of the fifteenth
legion: there was also with them Eternius, the leader of the two legions
that came from Alexandria; and Marcus Antonius Julianus, procurator of
Judea: after these came together all the rest of the procurators and
tribunes. Titus proposed to these that they should give him their advice
what should be done about the holy house. Now some of these thought
it would be the best way to act according to the rules of war, [and
demolish it,] because the Jews would never leave off rebelling while
that house was standing; at which house it was that they used to get all
together. Others of them were of opinion, that in case the Jews would
leave it, and none of them would lay their arms up in it, he might save
it; but that in case they got upon it, and fought any more, he might
burn it; because it must then be looked upon not as a holy house, but as
a citadel; and that the impiety of burning it would then belong to
those that forced this to be done, and not to them. But Titus said, that
"although the Jews should get upon that holy house, and fight us thence,
yet ought we not to revenge ourselves on things that are inanimate,
instead of the men themselves;" and that he was not in any case for
burning down so vast a work as that was, because this would be a
mischief to the Romans themselves, as it would be an ornament to their
government while it continued. So Fronto, and Alexander, and Cerealis
grew bold upon that declaration, and agreed to the opinion of Titus.
Then was this assembly dissolved, when Titus had given orders to the
commanders that the rest of their forces should lie still; but that they
should make use of such as were most courageous in this attack. So he
commanded that the chosen men that were taken out of the cohorts should
make their way through the ruins, and quench the fire.

4. Now it is true that on this day the Jews were so weary, and under
such consternation, that they refrained from any attacks. But on the
next day they gathered their whole force together, and ran upon those
that guarded the outward court of the temple very boldly, through the
east gate, and this about the second hour of the day. These guards
received that their attack with great bravery, and by covering
themselves with their shields before, as if it were with a wall, they
drew their squadron close together; yet was it evident that they could
not abide there very long, but would be overborne by the multitude of
those that sallied out upon them, and by the heat of their passion.
However, Caesar seeing, from the tower of Antonia, that this squadron
was likely to give way, he sent some chosen horsemen to support them.
Hereupon the Jews found themselves not able to sustain their onset, and
upon the slaughter of those in the forefront, many of the rest were put
to flight. But as the Romans were going off, the Jews turned upon them,
and fought them; and as those Romans came back upon them, they retreated
again, until about the fifth hour of the day they were overborne, and
shut themselves up in the inner [court of the] temple.

5. So Titus retired into the tower of Antonia, and resolved to storm the
temple the next day, early in the morning, with his whole army, and to
encamp round about the holy house. But as for that house, God had, for
certain, long ago doomed it to the fire; and now that fatal day was
come, according to the revolution of ages; it was the tenth day of
the month Lous, [Ab,] upon which it was formerly burnt by the king of
Babylon; although these flames took their rise from the Jews themselves,
and were occasioned by them; for upon Titus's retiring, the seditious
lay still for a little while, and then attacked the Romans again, when
those that guarded the holy house fought with those that quenched the
fire that was burning the inner [court of the] temple; but these Romans
put the Jews to flight, and proceeded as far as the holy house itself.
At which time one of the soldiers, without staying for any orders, and
without any concern or dread upon him at so great an undertaking, and
being hurried on by a certain divine fury, snatched somewhat out of the
materials that were on fire, and being lifted up by another soldier, he
set fire to a golden window, through which there was a passage to the
rooms that were round about the holy house, on the north side of it. As
the flames went upward, the Jews made a great clamor, such as so mighty
an affliction required, and ran together to prevent it; and now they
spared not their lives any longer, nor suffered any thing to restrain
their force, since that holy house was perishing, for whose sake it was
that they kept such a guard about it.

6. And now a certain person came running to Titus, and told him of
this fire, as he was resting himself in his tent after the last battle;
whereupon he rose up in great haste, and, as he was, ran to the holy
house, in order to have a stop put to the fire; after him followed all
his commanders, and after them followed the several legions, in great
astonishment; so there was a great clamor and tumult raised, as was
natural upon the disorderly motion of so great an army. Then did Caesar,
both by calling to the soldiers that were fighting, with a loud voice,
and by giving a signal to them with his right hand, order them to quench
the fire. But they did not hear what he said, though he spake so loud,
having their ears already dimmed by a greater noise another way; nor did
they attend to the signal he made with his hand neither, as still some
of them were distracted with fighting, and others with passion. But as
for the legions that came running thither, neither any persuasions
nor any threatenings could restrain their violence, but each one's own
passion was his commander at this time; and as they were crowding into
the temple together, many of them were trampled on by one another, while
a great number fell among the ruins of the cloisters, which were still
hot and smoking, and were destroyed in the same miserable way with those
whom they had conquered; and when they were come near the holy house,
they made as if they did not so much as hear Caesar's orders to the
contrary; but they encouraged those that were before them to set it on
fire. As for the seditious, they were in too great distress already to
afford their assistance [towards quenching the fire]; they were every
where slain, and every where beaten; and as for a great part of the
people, they were weak and without arms, and had their throats cut
wherever they were caught. Now round about the altar lay dead bodies
heaped one upon another, as at the steps 16 going up to it ran a great
quantity of their blood, whither also the dead bodies that were slain
above [on the altar] fell down.

7. And now, since Caesar was no way able to restrain the enthusiastic
fury of the soldiers, and the fire proceeded on more and more, he went
into the holy place of the temple, with his commanders, and saw it, with
what was in it, which he found to be far superior to what the relations
of foreigners contained, and not inferior to what we ourselves boasted
of and believed about it. But as the flame had not as yet reached to its
inward parts, but was still consuming the rooms that were about the
holy house, and Titus supposing what the fact was, that the house itself
might yet be saved, he came in haste and endeavored to persuade the
soldiers to quench the fire, and gave order to Liberalius the centurion,
and one of those spearmen that were about him, to beat the soldiers that
were refractory with their staves, and to restrain them; yet were their
passions too hard for the regards they had for Caesar, and the dread
they had of him who forbade them, as was their hatred of the Jews, and
a certain vehement inclination to fight them, too hard for them also.
Moreover, the hope of plunder induced many to go on, as having this
opinion, that all the places within were full of money, and as seeing
that all round about it was made of gold. And besides, one of those
that went into the place prevented Caesar, when he ran so hastily out to
restrain the soldiers, and threw the fire upon the hinges of the gate,
in the dark; whereby the flame burst out from within the holy house
itself immediately, when the commanders retired, and Caesar with them,
and when nobody any longer forbade those that were without to set
fire to it. And thus was the holy house burnt down, without Caesar's
approbation.

8. Now although any one would justly lament the destruction of such a
work as this was, since it was the most admirable of all the works
that we have seen or heard of, both for its curious structure and its
magnitude, and also for the vast wealth bestowed upon it, as well as for
the glorious reputation it had for its holiness; yet might such a one
comfort himself with this thought, that it was fate that decreed it so
to be, which is inevitable, both as to living creatures, and as to works
and places also. However, one cannot but wonder at the accuracy of this
period thereto relating; for the same month and day were now observed,
as I said before, wherein the holy house was burnt formerly by the
Babylonians. Now the number of years that passed from its first
foundation, which was laid by king Solomon, till this its destruction,
which happened in the second year of the reign of Vespasian, are
collected to be one thousand one hundred and thirty, besides seven
months and fifteen days; and from the second building of it, which
was done by Haggai, in the second year of Cyrus the king, till its
destruction under Vespasian, there were six hundred and thirty-nine
years and forty-five days.






CHAPTER 5.


     The Great Distress The Jews Were In Upon The Conflagration
     Of The Holy House. Concerning A False Prophet, And The Signs
     That Preceded This Destruction.

1. While the holy house was on fire, every thing was plundered that came
to hand, and ten thousand of those that were caught were slain; nor
was there a commiseration of any age, or any reverence of gravity, but
children, and old men, and profane persons, and priests were all slain
in the same manner; so that this war went round all sorts of men, and
brought them to destruction, and as well those that made supplication
for their lives, as those that defended themselves by fighting. The
flame was also carried a long way, and made an echo, together with the
groans of those that were slain; and because this hill was high, and the
works at the temple were very great, one would have thought the whole
city had been on fire. Nor can one imagine any thing either greater
or more terrible than this noise; for there was at once a shout of the
Roman legions, who were marching all together, and a sad clamor of the
seditious, who were now surrounded with fire and sword. The people also
that were left above were beaten back upon the enemy, and under a great
consternation, and made sad moans at the calamity they were under; the
multitude also that was in the city joined in this outcry with those
that were upon the hill. And besides, many of those that were worn away
by the famine, and their mouths almost closed, when they saw the fire of
the holy house, they exerted their utmost strength, and brake out into
groans and outcries again: Perea 17 did also return the echo, as well
as the mountains round about [the city,] and augmented the force of
the entire noise. Yet was the misery itself more terrible than this
disorder; for one would have thought that the hill itself, on which the
temple stood, was seething hot, as full of fire on every part of it,
that the blood was larger in quantity than the fire, and those that were
slain more in number than those that slew them; for the ground did
no where appear visible, for the dead bodies that lay on it; but the
soldiers went over heaps of those bodies, as they ran upon such as fled
from them. And now it was that the multitude of the robbers were thrust
out [of the inner court of the temple by the Romans,] and had much ado
to get into the outward court, and from thence into the city, while the
remainder of the populace fled into the cloister of that outer court. As
for the priests, some of them plucked up from the holy house the spikes
18 that were upon it, with their bases, which were made of lead, and
shot them at the Romans instead of darts. But then as they gained
nothing by so doing, and as the fire burst out upon them, they retired
to the wall that was eight cubits broad, and there they tarried; yet did
two of these of eminence among them, who might have saved themselves by
going over to the Romans, or have borne up with courage, and taken their
fortune with the others, throw themselves into the fire, and were burnt
together with the holy house; their names were Meirus the son of Belgas,
and Joseph the son of Daleus.

2. And now the Romans, judging that it was in vain to spare what was
round about the holy house, burnt all those places, as also the remains
of the cloisters and the gates, two excepted; the one on the east side,
and the other on the south; both which, however, they burnt afterward.
They also burnt down the treasury chambers, in which was an immense
quantity of money, and an immense number of garments, and other precious
goods there reposited; and, to speak all in a few words, there it was
that the entire riches of the Jews were heaped up together, while
the rich people had there built themselves chambers [to contain such
furniture]. The soldiers also came to the rest of the cloisters that
were in the outer [court of the] temple, whither the women and children,
and a great mixed multitude of the people, fled, in number about six
thousand. But before Caesar had determined any thing about these people,
or given the commanders any orders relating to them, the soldiers were
in such a rage, that they set that cloister on fire; by which means it
came to pass that some of these were destroyed by throwing themselves
down headlong, and some were burnt in the cloisters themselves. Nor
did any one of them escape with his life. A false prophet 19 was
the occasion of these people's destruction, who had made a public
proclamation in the city that very day, that God commanded them to get
upon the temple, and that there they should receive miraculous signs of
their deliverance. Now there was then a great number of false prophets
suborned by the tyrants to impose on the people, who denounced this to
them, that they should wait for deliverance from God; and this was in
order to keep them from deserting, and that they might be buoyed up
above fear and care by such hopes. Now a man that is in adversity does
easily comply with such promises; for when such a seducer makes him
believe that he shall be delivered from those miseries which oppress
him, then it is that the patient is full of hopes of such his
deliverance.

3. Thus were the miserable people persuaded by these deceivers, and such
as belied God himself; while they did not attend nor give credit to the
signs that were so evident, and did so plainly foretell their future
desolation, but, like men infatuated, without either eyes to see or
minds to consider, did not regard the denunciations that God made to
them. Thus there was a star 20 resembling a sword, which stood over the
city, and a comet, that continued a whole year. Thus also before the
Jews' rebellion, and before those commotions which preceded the war,
when the people were come in great crowds to the feast of unleavened
bread, on the eighth day of the month Xanthicus, 21 [Nisan,] and at the
ninth hour of the night, so great a light shone round the altar and the
holy house, that it appeared to be bright day time; which lasted for
half an hour. This light seemed to be a good sign to the unskillful,
but was so interpreted by the sacred scribes, as to portend those events
that followed immediately upon it. At the same festival also, a heifer,
as she was led by the high priest to be sacrificed, brought forth a lamb
in the midst of the temple. Moreover, the eastern gate of the inner 22
[court of the] temple, which was of brass, and vastly heavy, and had
been with difficulty shut by twenty men, and rested upon a basis armed
with iron, and had bolts fastened very deep into the firm floor, which
was there made of one entire stone, was seen to be opened of its own
accord about the sixth hour of the night. Now those that kept watch in
the temple came hereupon running to the captain of the temple, and told
him of it; who then came up thither, and not without great difficulty
was able to shut the gate again. This also appeared to the vulgar to
be a very happy prodigy, as if God did thereby open them the gate of
happiness. But the men of learning understood it, that the security of
their holy house was dissolved of its own accord, and that the gate was
opened for the advantage of their enemies. So these publicly declared
that the signal foreshowed the desolation that was coming upon them.
Besides these, a few days after that feast, on the one and twentieth
day of the month Artemisius, [Jyar,] a certain prodigious and incredible
phenomenon appeared: I suppose the account of it would seem to be a
fable, were it not related by those that saw it, and were not the events
that followed it of so considerable a nature as to deserve such signals;
for, before sun-setting, chariots and troops of soldiers in their armor
were seen running about among the clouds, and surrounding of cities.
Moreover, at that feast which we call Pentecost, as the priests were
going by night into the inner [court of the temple,] as their custom
was, to perform their sacred ministrations, they said that, in the first
place, they felt a quaking, and heard a great noise, and after that they
heard a sound as of a great multitude, saying, "Let us remove hence."
But, what is still more terrible, there was one Jesus, the son of
Ananus, a plebeian and a husbandman, who, four years before the
war began, and at a time when the city was in very great peace and
prosperity, came to that feast whereon it is our custom for every one
to make tabernacles to God in the temple, 23 began on a sudden to cry
aloud, "A voice from the east, a voice from the west, a voice from
the four winds, a voice against Jerusalem and the holy house, a voice
against the bridegrooms and the brides, and a voice against this whole
people!" This was his cry, as he went about by day and by night, in all
the lanes of the city. However, certain of the most eminent among the
populace had great indignation at this dire cry of his, and took up
the man, and gave him a great number of severe stripes; yet did not he
either say any thing for himself, or any thing peculiar to those that
chastised him, but still went on with the same words which he cried
before. Hereupon our rulers, supposing, as the case proved to be, that
this was a sort of divine fury in the man, brought him to the Roman
procurator, where he was whipped till his bones were laid bare; yet
he did not make any supplication for himself, nor shed any tears, but
turning his voice to the most lamentable tone possible, at every stroke
of the whip his answer was, "Woe, woe to Jerusalem!" And when Albinus
[for he was then our procurator] asked him, Who he was? and whence he
came? and why he uttered such words? he made no manner of reply to what
he said, but still did not leave off his melancholy ditty, till Albinus
took him to be a madman, and dismissed him. Now, during all the time
that passed before the war began, this man did not go near any of
the citizens, nor was seen by them while he said so; but he every day
uttered these lamentable words, as if it were his premeditated vow,
"Woe, woe to Jerusalem!" Nor did he give ill words to any of those that
beat him every day, nor good words to those that gave him food; but this
was his reply to all men, and indeed no other than a melancholy presage
of what was to come. This cry of his was the loudest at the festivals;
and he continued this ditty for seven years and five months, without
growing hoarse, or being tired therewith, until the very time that he
saw his presage in earnest fulfilled in our siege, when it ceased; for
as he was going round upon the wall, he cried out with his utmost force,
"Woe, woe to the city again, and to the people, and to the holy house!"
And just as he added at the last, "Woe, woe to myself also!" there
came a stone out of one of the engines, and smote him, and killed him
immediately; and as he was uttering the very same presages he gave up
the ghost.

4. Now if any one consider these things, he will find that God takes
care of mankind, and by all ways possible foreshows to our race what is
for their preservation; but that men perish by those miseries which
they madly and voluntarily bring upon themselves; for the Jews, by
demolishing the tower of Antonia, had made their temple four-square,
while at the same time they had it written in their sacred oracles,
"That then should their city be taken, as well as their holy house, when
once their temple should become four-square." But now, what did the most
elevate them in undertaking this war, was an ambiguous oracle that was
also found in their sacred writings, how, "about that time, one from
their country should become governor of the habitable earth." The Jews
took this prediction to belong to themselves in particular, and many
of the wise men were thereby deceived in their determination. Now this
oracle certainly denoted the government of Vespasian, who was appointed
emperor in Judea. However, it is not possible for men to avoid fate,
although they see it beforehand. But these men interpreted some of these
signals according to their own pleasure, and some of them they utterly
despised, until their madness was demonstrated, both by the taking of
their city and their own destruction.






CHAPTER 6.


     How The Romans Carried Their Ensigns To The Temple, And Made
     Joyful Acclamations To Titus. The Speech That Titus Made To
     The Jews When They Made Supplication For Mercy. What Reply
     They Made Thereto; And How That Reply Moved Titus's
     Indignation Against Them.

1. And now the Romans, upon the flight of the seditious into the city,
and upon the burning of the holy house itself, and of all the buildings
round about it, brought their ensigns to the temple 24 and set them over
against its eastern gate; and there did they offer sacrifices to
them, and there did they make Titus imperator 25 with the greatest
acclamations of joy. And now all the soldiers had such vast quantities
of the spoils which they had gotten by plunder, that in Syria a pound
weight of gold was sold for half its former value. But as for those
priests that kept themselves still upon the wall of the holy house,26
there was a boy that, out of the thirst he was in, desired some of the
Roman guards to give him their right hands as a security for his life,
and confessed he was very thirsty. These guards commiserated his age,
and the distress he was in, and gave him their right hands accordingly.
So he came down himself, and drank some water, and filled the vessel
he had with him when he came to them with water, and then went off, and
fled away to his own friends; nor could any of those guards overtake
him; but still they reproached him for his perfidiousness. To which he
made this answer: "I have not broken the agreement; for the security I
had given me was not in order to my staying with you, but only in order
to my coming down safely, and taking up some water; both which things I
have performed, and thereupon think myself to have been faithful to my
engagement." Hereupon those whom the child had imposed upon admired at
his cunning, and that on account of his age. On the fifth day afterward,
the priests that were pined with the famine came down, and when they
were brought to Titus by the guards, they begged for their lives; but he
replied, that the time of pardon was over as to them, and that this
very holy house, on whose account only they could justly hope to be
preserved, was destroyed; and that it was agreeable to their office that
priests should perish with the house itself to which they belonged. So
he ordered them to be put to death.

2. But as for the tyrants themselves, and those that were with them,
when they found that they were encompassed on every side, and, as it
were, walled round, without any method of escaping, they desired to
treat with Titus by word of mouth. Accordingly, such was the kindness
of his nature, and his desire of preserving the city from destruction,
joined to the advice of his friends, who now thought the robbers were
come to a temper, that he placed himself on the western side of the
outer [court of the] temple; for there were gates on that side above the
Xystus, and a bridge that connected the upper city to the temple. This
bridge it was that lay between the tyrants and Caesar, and parted them;
while the multitude stood on each side; those of the Jewish nation
about Sinran and John, with great hopes of pardon; and the Romans about
Caesar, in great expectation how Titus would receive their supplication.
So Titus charged his soldiers to restrain their rage, and to let their
darts alone, and appointed an interpreter between them, which was a sign
that he was the conqueror, and first began the discourse, and said, "I
hope you, sirs, are now satiated with the miseries of your country, who
have not had any just notions, either of our great power, or of your own
great weakness, but have, like madmen, after a violent and inconsiderate
manner, made such attempts, as have brought your people, your city, and
your holy house to destruction. You have been the men that have never
left off rebelling since Pompey first conquered you, and have, since
that time, made open war with the Romans. Have you depended on your
multitude, while a very small part of the Roman soldiery have been
strong enough for you? Have you relied on the fidelity of your
confederates? And what nations are there, out of the limits of our
dominion, that would choose to assist the Jews before the Romans? Are
your bodies stronger than ours? nay, you know that the [strong] Germans
themselves are our servants. Have you stronger walls than we have? Pray,
what greater obstacle is there than the wall of the ocean, with which
the Britons are encompassed, and yet do adore the arms of the Romans.
Do you exceed us in courage of soul, and in the sagacity of your
commanders? Nay, indeed, you cannot but know that the very Carthaginians
have been conquered by us. It can therefore be nothing certainly but
the kindness of us Romans which hath excited you against us; who, in
the first place, have given you this land to possess; and, in the next
place, have set over you kings of your own nation; and, in the third
place, have preserved the laws of your forefathers to you, and have
withal permitted you to live, either by yourselves, or among others, as
it should please you: and, what is our chief favor of all we have given
you leave to gather up that tribute which is paid to God 27 with such
other gifts that are dedicated to him; nor have we called those that
carried these donations to account, nor prohibited them; till at length
you became richer than we ourselves, even when you were our enemies; and
you made preparations for war against us with our own money; nay, after
all, when you were in the enjoyment of all these advantages, you
turned your too great plenty against those that gave it you, and, like
merciless serpents, have thrown out your poison against those that
treated you kindly. I suppose, therefore, that you might despise the
slothfulness of Nero, and, like limbs of the body that are broken or
dislocated, you did then lie quiet, waiting for some other time, though
still with a malicious intention, and have now showed your distemper
to be greater than ever, and have extended your desires as far as your
impudent and immense hopes would enable you to do it. At this time my
father came into this country, not with a design to punish you for what
you had done under Cestius, but to admonish you; for had he come to
overthrow your nation, he had run directly to your fountain-head, and
had immediately laid this city waste; whereas he went and burnt Galilee
and the neighboring parts, and thereby gave you time for repentance;
which instance of humanity you took for an argument of his weakness, and
nourished up your impudence by our mildness. When Nero was gone out
of the world, you did as the wickedest wretches would have done, and
encouraged yourselves to act against us by our civil dissensions, and
abused that time, when both I and my father were gone away to Egypt,
to make preparations for this war. Nor were you ashamed to raise
disturbances against us when we were made emperors, and this while you
had experienced how mild we had been, when we were no more than generals
of the army. But when the government was devolved upon us, and all other
people did thereupon lie quiet, and even foreign nations sent embassies,
and congratulated our access to the government, then did you Jews show
yourselves to be our enemies. You sent embassies to those of your nation
that are beyond Euphrates to assist you in your raising disturbances;
new walls were built by you round your city, seditions arose, and one
tyrant contended against another, and a civil war broke out among you;
such indeed as became none but so wicked a people as you are. I then
came to this city, as unwillingly sent by my father, and received
melancholy injunctions from him. When I heard that the people were
disposed to peace, I rejoiced at it; I exhorted you to leave off these
proceedings before I began this war; I spared you even when you had
fought against me a great while; I gave my right hand as security to the
deserters; I observed what I had promised faithfully. When they fled
to me, I had compassion on many of those that I had taken captive; I
tortured those that were eager for war, in order to restrain them. It
was unwillingly that I brought my engines of war against your walls; I
always prohibited my soldiers, when they were set upon your slaughter,
from their severity against you. After every victory I persuaded you
to peace, as though I had been myself conquered. When I came near your
temple, I again departed from the laws of war, and exhorted you to spare
your own sanctuary, and to preserve your holy house to yourselves. I
allowed you a quiet exit out of it, and security for your preservation;
nay, if you had a mind, I gave you leave to fight in another place. Yet
have you still despised every one of my proposals, and have set fire
to your holy house with your own hands. And now, vile wretches, do you
desire to treat with me by word of mouth? To what purpose is it that you
would save such a holy house as this was, which is now destroyed? What
preservation can you now desire after the destruction of your temple?
Yet do you stand still at this very time in your armor; nor can you
bring yourselves so much as to pretend to be supplicants even in this
your utmost extremity. O miserable creatures! what is it you depend on?
Are not your people dead? is not your holy house gone? is not your city
in my power? and are not your own very lives in my hands? And do you
still deem it a part of valor to die? However, I will not imitate your
madness. If you throw down your arms, and deliver up your bodies to me,
I grant you your lives; and I will act like a mild master of a family;
what cannot be healed shall be punished, and the rest I will preserve
for my own use."

3. To that offer of Titus they made this reply: That they could not
accept of it, because they had sworn never to do so; but they desired
they might have leave to go through the wall that had been made about
them, with their wives and children; for that they would go into the
desert, and leave the city to him. At this Titus had great indignation,
that when they were in the case of men already taken captives, they
should pretend to make their own terms with him, as if they had been
conquerors. So he ordered this proclamation to be made to them, That
they should no more come out to him as deserters, nor hope for any
further security; for that he would henceforth spare nobody, but fight
them with his whole army; and that they must save themselves as well as
they could; for that he would from henceforth treat them according to
the laws of war. So he gave orders to the soldiers both to burn and to
plunder the city; who did nothing indeed that day; but on the next
day they set fire to the repository of the archives, to Acra, to the
council-house, and to the place called Ophlas; at which time the fire
proceeded as far as the palace of queen Helena, which was in the middle
of Acra; the lanes also were burnt down, as were also those houses that
were full of the dead bodies of such as were destroyed by famine.

4. On the same day it was that the sons and brethren of Izates the
king, together with many others of the eminent men of the populace,
got together there, and besought Caesar to give them his right hand for
their security; upon which, though he was very angry at all that were
now remaining, yet did he not lay aside his old moderation, but received
these men. At that time, indeed, he kept them all in custody, but still
bound the king's sons and kinsmen, and led them with him to Rome, in
order to make them hostages for their country's fidelity to the Romans.






CHAPTER 7.


     What Afterward Befell The Seditious When They Had Done A
     Great Deal Of Mischief, And Suffered Many Misfortunes; As
     Also How Caesar Became Master Of The Upper City.

1. And now the seditious rushed into the royal palace, into which many
had put their effects, because it was so strong, and drove the Romans
away from it. They also slew all the people that had crowded into it,
who were in number about eight thousand four hundred, and plundered them
of what they had. They also took two of the Romans alive; the one was
a horseman, and the other a footman. They then cut the throat of the
footman, and immediately had him drawn through the whole city, as
revenging themselves upon the whole body of the Romans by this one
instance. But the horseman said he had somewhat to suggest to them in
order to their preservation; whereupon he was brought before Simon; but
he having nothing to say when he was there, he was delivered to Ardalas,
one of his commanders, to be punished, who bound his hands behind him,
and put a riband over his eyes, and then brought him out over against
the Romans, as intending to cut off his head. But the man prevented
that execution, and ran away to the Romans, and this while the Jewish
executioner was drawing out his sword. Now when he was gotten away from
the enemy, Titus could not think of putting him to death; but because he
deemed him unworthy of being a Roman soldier any longer, on account that
he had been taken alive by the enemy, he took away his arms, and ejected
him out of the legion whereto he had belonged; which, to one that had a
sense of shame, was a penalty severer than death itself.

2. On the next day the Romans drove the robbers out of the lower city,
and set all on fire as far as Siloam. These soldiers were indeed glad
to see the city destroyed. But they missed the plunder, because the
seditious had carried off all their effects, and were retired into the
upper city; for they did not yet at all repent of the mischiefs they had
done, but were insolent, as if they had done well; for, as they saw the
city on fire, they appeared cheerful, and put on joyful countenances, in
expectation, as they said, of death to end their miseries. Accordingly,
as the people were now slain, the holy house was burnt down, and the
city was on fire, there was nothing further left for the enemy to do.
Yet did not Josephus grow weary, even in this utmost extremity, to beg
of them to spare what was left of the city; he spake largely to them
about their barbarity and impiety, and gave them his advice in order to
their escape; though he gained nothing thereby more than to be laughed
at by them; and as they could not think of surrendering themselves up,
because of the oath they had taken, nor were strong enough to fight with
the Romans any longer upon the square, as being surrounded on all sides,
and a kind of prisoners already, yet were they so accustomed to kill
people, that they could not restrain their right hands from acting
accordingly. So they dispersed themselves before the city, and laid
themselves in ambush among its ruins, to catch those that attempted to
desert to the Romans; accordingly many such deserters were caught by
them, and were all slain; for these were too weak, by reason of their
want of food, to fly away from them; so their dead bodies were thrown to
the dogs. Now every other sort of death was thought more tolerable than
the famine, insomuch that, though the Jews despaired now of mercy, yet
would they fly to the Romans, and would themselves, even of their own
accord, fall among the murderous rebels also. Nor was there any place
in the city that had no dead bodies in it, but what was entirely covered
with those that were killed either by the famine or the rebellion; and
all was full of the dead bodies of such as had perished, either by that
sedition or by that famine.

3. So now the last hope which supported the tyrants, and that crew of
robbers who were with them, was in the caves and caverns under ground;
whither, if they could once fly, they did not expect to be searched for;
but endeavored, that after the whole city should be destroyed, and the
Romans gone away, they might come out again, and escape from them. This
was no better than a dream of theirs; for they were not able to lie
hid either from God or from the Romans. However, they depended on these
under-ground subterfuges, and set more places on fire than did the
Romans themselves; and those that fled out of their houses thus set
on fire into the ditches, they killed without mercy, and pillaged them
also; and if they discovered food belonging to any one, they seized upon
it and swallowed it down, together with their blood also; nay, they were
now come to fight one with another about their plunder; and I cannot
but think that, had not their destruction prevented it, their barbarity
would have made them taste of even the dead bodies themselves.






CHAPTER 8.


     How Caesar Raised Banks Round About The Upper City [Mount
     Zion] And When They Were Completed, Gave Orders That The
     Machines Should Be Brought. He Then Possessed Himself Of The
     Whole City.

1. Now when Caesar perceived that the upper city was so steep that
it could not possibly be taken without raising banks against it, he
distributed the several parts of that work among his army, and this
on the twentieth day of the month Lous [Ab]. Now the carriage of the
materials was a difficult task, since all the trees, as I have already
told you, that were about the city, within the distance of a hundred
furlongs, had their branches cut off already, in order to make the
former banks. The works that belonged to the four legions were erected
on the west side of the city, over against the royal palace; but the
whole body of the auxiliary troops, with the rest of the multitude that
were with them, [erected their banks] at the Xystus, whence they reached
to the bridge, and that tower of Simon which he had built as a citadel
for himself against John, when they were at war one with another.

2. It was at this time that the commanders of the Idumeans got together
privately, and took counsel about surrendering up themselves to the
Romans. Accordingly, they sent five men to Titus, and entreated him to
give them his right hand for their security. So Titus thinking that the
tyrants would yield, if the Idumeans, upon whom a great part of the
war depended, were once withdrawn from them, after some reluctancy and
delay, complied with them, and gave them security for their lives, and
sent the five men back. But as these Idumeans were preparing to march
out, Simon perceived it, and immediately slew the five men that had gone
to Titus, and took their commanders, and put them in prison, of whom the
most eminent was Jacob, the son of Sosas; but as for the multitude of
the Idumeans, who did not at all know what to do, now their commanders
were taken from them, he had them watched, and secured the walls by a
more numerous garrison, Yet could not that garrison resist those that
were deserting; for although a great number of them were slain, yet were
the deserters many more in number. They were all received by the Romans,
because Titus himself grew negligent as to his former orders for killing
them, and because the very soldiers grew weary of killing them, and
because they hoped to get some money by sparing them; for they left only
the populace, and sold the rest of the multitude, 28 with their wives
and children, and every one of them at a very low price, and that
because such as were sold were very many, and the buyers were few: and
although Titus had made proclamation beforehand, that no deserter should
come alone by himself, that so they might bring out their families with
them, yet did he receive such as these also. However, he set over them
such as were to distinguish some from others, in order to see if any of
them deserved to be punished. And indeed the number of those that were
sold was immense; but of the populace above forty thousand were saved,
whom Caesar let go whither every one of them pleased.

3. But now at this time it was that one of the priests, the son of
Thebuthus, whose name was Jesus, upon his having security given him, by
the oath of Caesar, that he should be preserved, upon condition that
he should deliver to him certain of the precious things that had been
reposited in the temple 29 came out of it, and delivered him from the
wall of the holy house two candlesticks, like to those that lay in the
holy house, with tables, and cisterns, and vials, all made of solid
gold, and very heavy. He also delivered to him the veils and the
garments, with the precious stones, and a great number of other precious
vessels that belonged to their sacred worship. The treasurer of the
temple also, whose name was Phineas, was seized on, and showed Titus the
coats and girdles of the priests, with a great quantity of purple and
scarlet, which were there reposited for the uses of the veil, as also a
great deal of cinnamon and cassia, with a large quantity of other sweet
spices, 30 which used to be mixed together, and offered as incense to
God every day. A great many other treasures were also delivered to
him, with sacred ornaments of the temple not a few; which things thus
delivered to Titus obtained of him for this man the same pardon that he
had allowed to such as deserted of their own accord.

4. And now were the banks finished on the seventh day of the month
Gorpieus, [Elul,] in eighteen days' time, when the Romans brought their
machines against the wall. But for the seditious, some of them, as
despairing of saving the city, retired from the wall to the citadel;
others of them went down into the subterranean vaults, though still a
great many of them defended themselves against those that brought the
engines for the battery; yet did the Romans overcome them by their
number and by their strength; and, what was the principal thing of
all, by going cheerfully about their work, while the Jews were quite
dejected, and become weak. Now as soon as a part of the wall was
battered down, and certain of the towers yielded to the impression of
the battering rams, those that opposed themselves fled away, and such
a terror fell upon the tyrants, as was much greater than the occasion
required; for before the enemy got over the breach they were quite
stunned, and were immediately for flying away. And now one might see
these men, who had hitherto been so insolent and arrogant in their
wicked practices, to be cast down and to tremble, insomuch that it
would pity one's heart to observe the change that was made in those vile
persons. Accordingly, they ran with great violence upon the Roman wall
that encompassed them, in order to force away those that guarded it, and
to break through it, and get away. But when they saw that those who had
formerly been faithful to them had gone away, [as indeed they were fled
whithersoever the great distress they were in persuaded them to flee,]
as also when those that came running before the rest told them that the
western wall was entirely overthrown, while others said the Romans were
gotten in, and others that they were near, and looking out for them,
which were only the dictates of their fear, which imposed upon their
sight, they fell upon their face, and greatly lamented their own mad
conduct; and their nerves were so terribly loosed, that they could
not flee away. And here one may chiefly reflect on the power of God
exercised upon these wicked wretches, and on the good fortune of the
Romans; for these tyrants did now wholly deprive themselves of the
security they had in their own power, and came down from those very
towers of their own accord, wherein they could have never been taken
by force, nor indeed by any other way than by famine. And thus did the
Romans, when they had taken such great pains about weaker walls, get
by good fortune what they could never have gotten by their engines;
for three of these towers were too strong for all mechanical engines
whatsoever, concerning which we have treated above.

5. So they now left these towers of themselves, or rather they were
ejected out of them by God himself, and fled immediately to that valley
which was under Siloam, where they again recovered themselves out of the
dread they were in for a while, and ran violently against that part of
the Roman wall which lay on that side; but as their courage was too much
depressed to make their attacks with sufficient force, and their power
was now broken with fear and affliction, they were repulsed by the
guards, and dispersing themselves at distances from each other, went
down into the subterranean caverns. So the Romans being now become
masters of the walls, they both placed their ensigns upon the towers,
and made joyful acclamations for the victory they had gained, as having
found the end of this war much lighter than its beginning; for when they
had gotten upon the last wall, without any bloodshed, they could hardly
believe what they found to be true; but seeing nobody to oppose them,
they stood in doubt what such an unusual solitude could mean. But when
they went in numbers into the lanes of the city with their swords drawn,
they slew those whom they overtook without and set fire to the houses
whither the Jews were fled, and burnt every soul in them, and laid
waste a great many of the rest; and when they were come to the houses
to plunder them, they found in them entire families of dead men, and
the upper rooms full of dead corpses, that is, of such as died by the
famine; they then stood in a horror at this sight, and went out without
touching any thing. But although they had this commiseration for such as
were destroyed in that manner, yet had they not the same for those that
were still alive, but they ran every one through whom they met with,
and obstructed the very lanes with their dead bodies, and made the whole
city run down with blood, to such a degree indeed that the fire of
many of the houses was quenched with these men's blood. And truly so it
happened, that though the slayers left off at the evening, yet did the
fire greatly prevail in the night; and as all was burning, came that
eighth day of the month Gorpieus [Elul] upon Jerusalem, a city that had
been liable to so many miseries during this siege, that, had it always
enjoyed as much happiness from its first foundation, it would certainly
have been the envy of the world. Nor did it on any other account so much
deserve these sore misfortunes, as by producing such a generation of men
as were the occasions of this its overthrow.






CHAPTER 9.


     What Injunctions Caesar Gave When He Was Come Within The
     City. The Number Of The Captives And Of Those That Perished
     In The Siege; As Also Concerning Those That Had Escaped Into
     The Subterranean Caverns, Among Whom Were The Tyrants Simon
     And John Themselves.

1. Now when Titus was come into this [upper] city, he admired not only
some other places of strength in it, but particularly those strong
towers which the tyrants in their mad conduct had relinquished; for when
he saw their solid altitude, and the largeness of their several stones,
and the exactness of their joints, as also how great was their breadth,
and how extensive their length, he expressed himself after the manner
following: "We have certainly had God for our assistant in this war,
and it was no other than God who ejected the Jews out of these
fortifications; for what could the hands of men or any machines do
towards overthrowing these towers?" At which time he had many such
discourses to his friends; he also let such go free as had been bound by
the tyrants, and were left in the prisons. To conclude, when he entirely
demolished the rest of the city, and overthrew its walls, he left
these towers as a monument of his good fortune, which had proved his
auxiliaries, and enabled him to take what could not otherwise have been
taken by him.

2. And now, since his soldiers were already quite tired with killing
men, and yet there appeared to be a vast multitude still remaining
alive, Caesar gave orders that they should kill none but those that were
in arms, and opposed them, but should take the rest alive. But, together
with those whom they had orders to slay, they slew the aged and the
infirm; but for those that were in their flourishing age, and who might
be useful to them, they drove them together into the temple, and shut
them up within the walls of the court of the women; over which Caesar
set one of his freed-men, as also Fronto, one of his own friends; which
last was to determine every one's fate, according to his merits. So
this Fronto slew all those that had been seditious and robbers, who were
impeached one by another; but of the young men he chose out the tallest
and most beautiful, and reserved them for the triumph; and as for the
rest of the multitude that were above seventeen years old, he put them
into bonds, and sent them to the Egyptian mines. 31 Titus also sent a
great number into the provinces, as a present to them, that they might
be destroyed upon their theatres, by the sword and by the wild beasts;
but those that were under seventeen years of age were sold for slaves.
Now during the days wherein Fronto was distinguishing these men, there
perished, for want of food, eleven thousand; some of whom did not taste
any food, through the hatred their guards bore to them; and others would
not take in any when it was given them. The multitude also was so very
great, that they were in want even of corn for their sustenance.

3. Now the number 32 of those that were carried captive during this
whole war was collected to be ninety-seven thousand; as was the number
of those that perished during the whole siege eleven hundred thousand,
the greater part of whom were indeed of the same nation [with the
citizens of Jerusalem], but not belonging to the city itself; for they
were come up from all the country to the feast of unleavened bread,
and were on a sudden shut up by an army, which, at the very first,
occasioned so great a straitness among them, that there came a
pestilential destruction upon them, and soon afterward such a famine, as
destroyed them more suddenly. And that this city could contain so many
people in it, is manifest by that number of them which was taken under
Cestius, who being desirous of informing Nero of the power of the city,
who otherwise was disposed to contemn that nation, entreated the high
priests, if the thing were possible, to take the number of their whole
multitude. So these high priests, upon the coming of that feast which
is called the Passover, when they slay their sacrifices, from the ninth
hour till the eleventh, but so that a company not less than ten 33
belong to every sacrifice, [for it is not lawful for them to feast
singly by themselves,] and many of us are twenty in a company, found
the number of sacrifices was two hundred and fifty-six thousand five
hundred; which, upon the allowance of no more than ten that feast
together, amounts to two millions seven hundred thousand and two hundred
persons that were pure and holy; for as to those that have the leprosy,
or the gonorrhea, or women that have their monthly courses, or such as
are otherwise polluted, it is not lawful for them to be partakers of
this sacrifice; nor indeed for any foreigners neither, who come hither
to worship.

4. Now this vast multitude is indeed collected out of remote places, but
the entire nation was now shut up by fate as in prison, and the
Roman army encompassed the city when it was crowded with inhabitants.
Accordingly, the multitude of those that therein perished exceeded all
the destructions that either men or God ever brought upon the world;
for, to speak only of what was publicly known, the Romans slew some
of them, some they carried captives, and others they made a search for
under ground, and when they found where they were, they broke up the
ground and slew all they met with. There were also found slain there
above two thousand persons, partly by their own hands, and partly by one
another, but chiefly destroyed by the famine; but then the ill savor
of the dead bodies was most offensive to those that lighted upon them,
insomuch that some were obliged to get away immediately, while others
were so greedy of gain, that they would go in among the dead bodies
that lay on heaps, and tread upon them; for a great deal of treasure was
found in these caverns, and the hope of gain made every way of getting
it to be esteemed lawful. Many also of those that had been put in prison
by the tyrants were now brought out; for they did not leave off their
barbarous cruelty at the very last: yet did God avenge himself upon them
both, in a manner agreeable to justice. As for John, he wanted food,
together with his brethren, in these caverns, and begged that the Romans
would now give him their right hand for his security, which he had
often proudly rejected before; but for Simon, he struggled hard with
the distress he was in, still he was forced to surrender himself, as we
shall relate hereafter; so he was reserved for the triumph, and to be
then slain; as was John condemned to perpetual imprisonment. And now the
Romans set fire to the extreme parts of the city, and burnt them down,
and entirely demolished its walls.






CHAPTER 10.


     That Whereas The City Of Jerusalem Had Been Five Times Taken
     Formerly, This Was The Second Time Of Its Desolation. A
     Brief Account Of Its History.

1. And thus was Jerusalem taken, in the second year of the reign of
Vespasian, on the eighth day of the month Gorpeius [Elul]. It had been
taken five 34 times before, though this was the second time of its
desolation; for Shishak, the king of Egypt, and after him Antiochus, and
after him Pompey, and after them Sosius and Herod, took the city, but
still preserved it; but before all these, the king of Babylon conquered
it, and made it desolate, one thousand four hundred and sixty-eight
years and six months after it was built. But he who first built it was
a potent man among the Canaanites, and is in our own tongue called
[Melchisedek], the Righteous King, for such he really was; on which
account he was [there] the first priest of God, and first built a temple
[there], 35 and called the city Jerusalem, which was formerly called
Salem. However, David, the king of the Jews, ejected the Canaanites,
and settled his own people therein. It was demolished entirely by the
Babylonians, four hundred and seventy-seven years and six months after
him. And from king David, who was the first of the Jews who reigned
therein, to this destruction under Titus, were one thousand one hundred
and seventy-nine years; but from its first building, till this last
destruction, were two thousand one hundred and seventy-seven years; yet
hath not its great antiquity, nor its vast riches, nor the diffusion
of its nation over all the habitable earth, nor the greatness of
the veneration paid to it on a religious account, been sufficient to
preserve it from being destroyed. And thus ended the siege of Jerusalem.

WAR BOOK 6 FOOTNOTES

1 (return) [ Reland notes here, very pertinently, that the tower of
Antonia stood higher than the floor of the temple or court adjoining
to it; and that accordingly they descended thence into the temple, as
Josephus elsewhere speaks also. See Book VI. ch. 2. sect. 5.]


2 (return) [ In this speech of Titus we may clearly see the notions
which the Romans then had of death, and of the happy state of those who
died bravely in war, and the contrary estate of those who died ignobly
in their beds by sickness. Reland here also produces two parallel
passages, the one out of Atonia Janus Marcellinus, concerning the Alani,
lib. 31, that "they judged that man happy who laid down his life in
battle;" the other of Valerius Maximus, lib. 11. ch. 6, who says, "that
the Cimbri and Celtiberi exulted for joy in the army, as being to go out
of the world gloriously and happily."]


3 (return) [ See the note on p. 809.]


4 (return) [ No wonder that this Julian, who had so many nails in his
shoes, slipped upon the pavement of the temple, which was smooth, and
laid with marble of different colors.]


5 (return) [ This was a remarkable day indeed, the seventeenth of
Panemuns. [Footnote Tamuz,] A.D. 70, when, according to Daniel's
prediction, six hundred and six years before, the Romans "in half a week
caused the sacrifice and oblation to cease," Daniel 9:27. For from the
month of February, A.D. 66, about which time Vespasian entered on this
war, to this very time, was just three years and a half. See Bishop
Lloyd's Tables of Chronology, published by Mr. Marshall, on this year.
Nor is it to be omitted, what year nearly confirms this duration of the
war, that four years before the war begun was somewhat above seven years
five months before the destruction of Jerusalem, ch. 5. sect. 3.]


6 (return) [ The same that in the New Testament is always so called, and
was then the common language of the Jews in Judea, which was the Syriac
dialect.]


7 (return) [ Our present copies of the Old Testament want this encomium
upon king Jechoniah or Jehoiachim, which it seems was in Josephus's
copy.]


8 (return) [ Of this oracle, see the note on B. IV. ch. 6. sect. 3.
Josephus, both here and in many places elsewhere, speaks so, that it is
most evident he was fully satisfied that God was on the Romans' side,
and made use of them now for the destruction of that wicked nation of
the Jews; which was for certain the true state of this matter, as the
prophet Daniel first, and our Savior himself afterwards, had clearly
foretold. See Lit. Accompl. of Proph. p. 64, etc.]


9 (return) [ Josephus had before told us, B. V. ch. 13. sect. 1, that
this fourth son of Matthias ran away to the Romans "before" his father's
and brethren's slaughter, and not "after" it, as here. The former
account is, in all probability, the truest; for had not that fourth
son escaped before the others were caught and put to death, he had been
caught and put to death with them. This last account, therefore, looks
like an instance of a small inadvertence of Josephus in the place before
us.]


10 (return) [ Of this partition-wall separating Jews and Gentiles, with
its pillars and inscription, see the description of the temples, ch.
15.]


11 (return) [ That these seditious Jews were the direct occasions
of their own destruction, and of the conflagration of their city and
temple, and that Titus earnestly and constantly labored to save both, is
here and every where most evident in Josephus.]


12 (return) [ Court of the Gentiles.]


13 (return) [ Court of Israel.]


14 (return) [ Of the court of the Gentiles.]


15 (return) [ What Josephus observes here, that no parallel examples
had been recorded before this time of such sieges, wherein mothers were
forced by extremity of famine to eat their own children, as had been
threatened to the Jews in the law of Moses, upon obstinate disobedience,
and more than once fulfilled, [see my Boyle's Lectures, p. 210-214,]
is by Dr. Hudson supposed to have had two or three parallel examples in
later ages. He might have had more examples, I suppose, of persons on
ship-board, or in a desert island, casting lots for each others' bodies;
but all this was only in cases where they knew of no possible way to
avoid death themselves but by killing and eating others. Whether such
examples come up to the present case may be doubted. The Romans were not
only willing, but very desirous, to grant those Jews in Jerusalem both
their lives and their liberties, and to save both their city and their
temple. But the zealots, the robbers, and the seditious would hearken to
no terms of submission. They voluntarily chose to reduce the citizens to
that extremity, as to force mothers to this unnatural barbarity, which,
in all its circumstances, has not, I still suppose, been hitherto
paralleled among the rest of mankind.]


16 (return) [ These steps to the altar of burnt-offering seem here
either an improper and inaccurate expression of Josephus, since it was
unlawful to make ladder steps; [see description of the temples, ch. 13.,
and note on Antiq. B. IV. ch. 8. sect. 5;] or else those steps or stairs
we now use were invented before the days of Herod the Great, and had
been here built by him; though the later Jews always deny it, and say
that even Herod's altar was ascended to by an acclivity only.]


17 (return) [ This Perea, if the word be not mistaken in the copies,
cannot well be that Perea which was beyond Jordan, whose mountains
were at a considerable distance from Jordan, and much too remote from
Jerusalem to join in this echo at the conflagration of the temple; but
Perea must be rather some mountains beyond the brook Cedron, as was the
Mount of Olives, or some others about such a distance from Jerusalem;
which observation is so obvious, that it is a wonder our commentators
here take no notice of it.]


18 (return) [ Reland I think here judges well, when he interprets these
spikes [Footnote of those that stood on the top of the holy house]
with sharp points; they were fixed into lead, to prevent the birds from
sitting there, and defiling the holy house; for such spikes there were
now upon it, as Josephus himself hath already assured us, B. V. ch. 5.
sect. 6.]


19 (return) [ Reland here takes notice, that these Jews, who had
despised the true Prophet, were deservedly abused and deluded by these
false ones.]


20 (return) [ Whether Josephus means that this star was different from
that comet which lasted a whole year, I cannot certainly determine. His
words most favor their being different one from another.]


21 (return) [ Since Josephus still uses the Syro-Macedonian month
Xanthicus for the Jewish month Nisan, this eighth, or, as Nicephorus
reads it, this ninth of Xanthicus or Nisan was almost a week before the
passover, on the fourteenth; about which time we learn from St.
John that many used to go "out of the country to Jerusalem to purify
themselves," John 11:55, with 12:1; in agreement with Josephus also, B.
V. ch. 3. sect. 1. And it might well be, that in the sight of these this
extraordinary light might appear.]


22 (return) [ This here seems to be the court of the priests.]


23 (return) [ Both Reland and Havercamp in this place alter the natural
punctuation and sense of Josephus, and this contrary to the opinion of
Valesilus and Dr. Hudson, lest Josephus should say that the Jews built
booths or tents within the temple at the feast of tabernacles; which
the later Rabbins will not allow to have been the ancient practice: but
then, since it is expressly told us in Nehemiah, ch. 8:16, that in still
elder times "the Jews made booths in the courts of the house of God"
at that festival, Josephus may well be permitted to say the same.
And indeed the modern Rabbins are of very small authority in all such
matters of remote antiquity.]


24 (return) [ Take Havercamp's note here: "This [says he] is a
remarkable place; and Tertullian truly says in his Apologetic, ch. 16.
p. 162, that the entire religion of the Roman camp almost consisted in
worshipping the ensigns, in swearing by the ensigns, and in preferring
the ensigns before all the [other] gods." See what Havercamp says upon
that place of Tertullian.]


25 (return) [ This declaring Titus imperator by the soldiers, upon such
signal success, and the slaughter of such a vast number of enemies, was
according to the usual practice of the Romans in like cases, as Reland
assures us on this place.]


26 (return) [ The Jews of later times agree with Josephus, that there
were hiding-places or secret chambers about the holy house, as Reland
here informs us, where he thinks he has found these very walls described
by them.]


27 (return) [ Spanheim notes here, that the Romans used to permit the
Jews to collect their sacred tribute, and send it to Jerusalem; of which
we have had abundant evidence in Josephus already on other occasions.]


28 (return) [ This innumerable multitude of Jews that were "sold" by the
Romans was an eminent completion of God's ancient threatening by Moses,
that if they apostatized from the obedience to his laws, they should
be "sold unto their enemies for bond-men and bond-women," Deuteronomy
28;68. See more especially the note on ch. 9. sect. 2. But one thing
is here peculiarly remarkable, that Moses adds, Though they should be
"sold" for slaves, yet "no man should buy them;" i.e. either they should
have none to redeem them from this sale into slavery; or rather, that
the slaves to be sold should be more than were the purchasers for them,
and so they should be sold for little or nothing; which is what Josephus
here affirms to have been the case at this time.]


29 (return) [ What became of these spoils of the temple that escaped the
fire, see Josephus himself hereafter, B. VII. ch. 5. sect. 5, and Reland
de Spoliis Templi, p. 129-138.]


30 (return) [ These various sorts of spices, even more than those four
which Moses prescribed, Exodus 31:34, we see were used in their public
worship under Herod's temple, particularly cinnamon and cassia; which
Reland takes particular notice of, as agreeing with the latter testimony
of the Talmudists.]


31 (return) [ See the several predictions that the Jews, if they became
obstinate in their idolatry and wickedness, should be sent again or sold
into Egypt for their punishment, Deuteronomy 28:68; Jeremiah 44:7; Hosea
8:13; 9:3; 9:4, 5; 2 Samuel 15:10-13; with Authentic Records, Part I. p.
49, 121; and Reland Painest And, tom. II. p. 715.]


32 (return) [ The whole multitude of the Jews that were destroyed during
the entire seven years before this time, in all the countries of and
bordering on Judea, is summed up by Archbishop Usher, from Lipsius, out
of Josephus, at the year of Christ 70, and amounts to 1,337,490. Nor
could there have been that number of Jews in Jerusalem to be destroyed
in this siege, as will be presently set down by Josephus, but that both
Jews and proselytes of justice were just then come up out of the other
countries of Galilee, Samaria, Judea, and Perea and other remoter
regions, to the passover, in vast numbers, and therein cooped up, as in
a prison, by the Roman army, as Josephus himself well observes in this
and the next section, and as is exactly related elsewhere, B. V. ch. 3.
sect. 1 and ch. 13. sect. 7.]


33 (return) [ This number of a company for one paschal lamb, between
ten and twenty, agrees exactly with the number thirteen, at our Savior's
last passover. As to the whole number of the Jews that used to come up
to the passover, and eat of it at Jerusalem, see the note on B. II.
ch. 14. sect. 3. This number ought to be here indeed just ten times the
number of the lambs, or just 2,565,000, by Josephus's own reasoning;
whereas it is, in his present copies, no less than 2,700,000, which last
number is, however, nearest the other number in the place now cited,
which is 3,000,000. But what is here chiefly remarkable is this, that no
foreign nation ever came thus to destroy the Jews at any of their solemn
festivals, from the days of Moses till this time, but came now upon
their apostasy from God, and from obedience to him. Nor is it possible,
in the nature of things, that in any other nation such vast numbers
should be gotten together, and perish in the siege of any one city
whatsoever, as now happened in Jerusalem.]


34 (return) [ This is the proper place for such as have closely
attended to these latter books of the War to peruse, and that with equal
attention, those distinct and plain predictions of Jesus of Nazareth, in
the Gospels thereto relating, as compared with their exact completions
in Josephus's history; upon which completions, as Dr. Whitby well
observes, Annot. on Matthew 24:2, no small part of the evidence for the
truth of the Christian religion does depend; and as I have step by
step compared them together in my Literal Accomplishment of Scripture
Prophecies. The reader is to observe further, that the true reason why I
have so seldom taken notice of those completions in the course of these
notes, notwithstanding their being so very remarkable, and frequently
so very obvious, is this, that I had entirely prevented myself in that
treatise beforehand; to which therefore I must here, once for all,
seriously refer every inquisitive reader. Besides these five here
enumerated, who had taken Jerusalem of old, Josephus, upon further
recollection, reckons a sixth, Antiq. B. XII. ch. 1. sect. 1, who should
have been here inserted in the second place; I mean Ptolemy, the son of
Lagus.]


35 (return) [ Why the great Bochart should say, [De Phoenic. Colon.
B. II. ch. iv.,] that "there are in this clause of Josephus as many
mistakes as words," I do by no means understand. Josephus thought
Melchisedek first built, or rather rebuilt and adorned, this city, and
that it was then called Salem, as Psalm 76:2; afterwards came to be
called Jerusalem; and that Melchisedek, being a priest as well as a
king, built to the true God therein a temple, or place for public Divine
worship and sacrifice; all which things may be very true for aught we
know to the contrary. And for the word, or temple, as if it must needs
belong to the great temple built by Solomon long afterward, Josephus
himself uses, for the small tabernacle of Moses, Antiq. B. III. ch. 6.
sect. 4; see also Antiq. B. lit. ch. 6. sect. 1; as he here presently
uses, for a large and splendid synagogue of the Jews at Antioch, B. VII.
ch. 3. sect. 3.]







BOOK VII.


     Containing The Interval Of About Three Years.

     From The Taking Of Jerusalem By Titus To The Sedition At
     Cyrene





CHAPTER 1.


     How The Entire City Of Jerusalem Was Demolished, Excepting
     Three Towers; And How Titus Commended His Soldiers In A
     Speech Made To Them, And Distributed Rewards To Them And
     Then Dismissed Many Of Them.

1. Now as soon as the army had no more people to slay or to plunder,
because there remained none to be the objects of their fury, [for they
would not have spared any, had there remained any other work to be
done,] Caesar gave orders that they should now demolish the entire city
and temple, but should leave as many of the towers standing as were of
the greatest eminency; that is, Phasaelus, and Hippicus, and Mariamne;
and so much of the wall as enclosed the city on the west side. This
wall was spared, in order to afford a camp for such as were to lie in
garrison, as were the towers also spared, in order to demonstrate to
posterity what kind of city it was, and how well fortified, which the
Roman valor had subdued; but for all the rest of the wall, it was so
thoroughly laid even with the ground by those that dug it up to the
foundation, that there was left nothing to make those that came thither
believe it had ever been inhabited. This was the end which Jerusalem
came to by the madness of those that were for innovations; a city
otherwise of great magnificence, and of mighty fame among all mankind.

2. But Caesar resolved to leave there, as a guard, the tenth legion,
with certain troops of horsemen, and companies of footmen. So, having
entirely completed this war, he was desirous to commend his whole army,
on account of the great exploits they had performed, and to bestow
proper rewards on such as had signalized themselves therein. He had
therefore a great tribunal made for him in the midst of the place
where he had formerly encamped, and stood upon it with his principal
commanders about him, and spake so as to be heard by the whole army
in the manner following: That he returned them abundance of thanks for
their good-will which they had showed to him: he commended them for that
ready obedience they had exhibited in this whole war, which obedience
had appeared in the many and great dangers which they had courageously
undergone; as also for that courage they had shown, and had thereby
augmented of themselves their country's power, and had made it evident
to all men, that neither the multitude of their enemies, nor the
strength of their places, nor the largeness of their cities, nor the
rash boldness and brutish rage of their antagonists, were sufficient at
any time to get clear of the Roman valor, although some of them may have
fortune in many respects on their side. He said further, that it was
but reasonable for them to put an end to this war, now it had lasted
so long, for that they had nothing better to wish for when they entered
into it; and that this happened more favorably for them, and more for
their glory, that all the Romans had willingly accepted of those for
their governors, and the curators of their dominions, whom they had
chosen for them, and had sent into their own country for that purpose,
which still continued under the management of those whom they had
pitched on, and were thankful to them for pitching upon them. That
accordingly, although he did both admire and tenderly regard them all,
because he knew that every one of them had gone as cheerfully about
their work as their abilities and opportunities would give them leave;
yet, he said, that he would immediately bestow rewards and dignities on
those that had fought the most bravely, and with greater force, and had
signalized their conduct in the most glorious manner, and had made his
army more famous by their noble exploits; and that no one who had
been willing to take more pains than another should miss of a just
retribution for the same; for that he had been exceeding careful about
this matter, and that the more, because he had much rather reward the
virtues of his fellow soldiers than punish such as had offended.

3. Hereupon Titus ordered those whose business it was to read the list
of all that had performed great exploits in this war, whom he called to
him by their names, and commended them before the company, and rejoiced
in them in the same manner as a man would have rejoiced in his own
exploits. He also put on their heads crowns of gold, and golden
ornaments about their necks, and gave them long spears of gold, and
ensigns that were made of silver, and removed every one of them to a
higher rank; and besides this, he plentifully distributed among them,
out of the spoils, and the other prey they had taken, silver, and
gold, and garments. So when they had all these honors bestowed on them,
according to his own appointment made to every one, and he had wished
all sorts of happiness to the whole army, he came down, among the great
acclamations which were made to him, and then betook himself to offer
thank-offerings [to the gods], and at once sacrificed a vast number of
oxen, that stood ready at the altars, and distributed them among the
army to feast on. And when he had staid three days among the principal
commanders, and so long feasted with them, he sent away the rest of his
army to the several places where they would be every one best situated;
but permitted the tenth legion to stay, as a guard at Jerusalem, and did
not send them away beyond Euphrates, where they had been before. And as
he remembered that the twelfth legion had given way to the Jews, under
Cestius their general, he expelled them out of all Syria, for they
had lain formerly at Raphanea, and sent them away to a place called
Meletine, near Euphrates, which is in the limits of Armenia and
Cappadocia; he also thought fit that two of the legions should stay with
him till he should go to Egypt. He then went down with his army to that
Cesarea which lay by the sea-side, and there laid up the rest of his
spoils in great quantities, and gave order that the captives should be
kept there; for the winter season hindered him then from sailing into
Italy.






CHAPTER 2.


     How Titus Exhibited All Sorts Of Shows At Cesarea Philippi.
     Concerning Simon The Tyrant How He Was Taken, And Reserved
     For The Triumph.

1. Now at the same time that Titus Caesar lay at the siege of Jerusalem,
did Vespasian go on board a merchantship and sailed from Alexandria to
Rhodes; whence he sailed away in ships with three rows of oars; and
as he touched at several cities that lay in his road, he was joyfully
received by them all, and so passed over from Ionia into Greece; whence
he set sail from Corcyra to the promontory of Iapyx, whence he took his
journey by land. But as for Titus, he marched from that Cesarea which
lay by the sea-side, and came to that which is named Cesarea Philippi,
and staid there a considerable time, and exhibited all sorts of shows
there. And here a great number of the captives were destroyed, some
being thrown to wild beasts, and others in multitudes forced to kill one
another, as if they were their enemies. And here it was that Titus was
informed of the seizure of Simon the son of Gioras, which was made after
the manner following: This Simon, during the siege of Jerusalem, was in
the upper city; but when the Roman army was gotten within the walls,
and were laying the city waste, he then took the most faithful of his
friends with him, and among them some that were stone-cutters, with
those iron tools which belonged to their occupation, and as great a
quantity of provisions as would suffice them for a long time, and let
himself and all them down into a certain subterraneous cavern that was
not visible above ground. Now, so far as had been digged of old, they
went onward along it without disturbance; but where they met with solid
earth, they dug a mine under ground, and this in hopes that they should
be able to proceed so far as to rise from under ground in a safe place,
and by that means escape. But when they came to make the experiment,
they were disappointed of their hope; for the miners could make but
small progress, and that with difficulty also; insomuch that their
provisions, though they distributed them by measure, began to fail
them. And now Simon, thinking he might be able to astonish and elude the
Romans, put on a white frock, and buttoned upon him a purple cloak, and
appeared out of the ground in the place where the temple had formerly
been. At the first, indeed, those that saw him were greatly astonished,
and stood still where they were; but afterward they came nearer to him,
and asked him who he was. Now Simon would not tell them, but bid them
call for their captain; and when they ran to call him, Terentius Rufus
2 who was left to command the army there, came to Simon, and learned of
him the whole truth, and kept him in bonds, and let Caesar know that he
was taken. Thus did God bring this man to be punished for what bitter
and savage tyranny he had exercised against his countrymen by those who
were his worst enemies; and this while he was not subdued by violence,
but voluntarily delivered himself up to them to be punished, and that
on the very same account that he had laid false accusations against many
Jews, as if they were falling away to the Romans, and had barbarously
slain them; for wicked actions do not escape the Divine anger, nor is
justice too weak to punish offenders, but in time overtakes those that
transgress its laws, and inflicts its punishments upon the wicked in a
manner, so much more severe, as they expected to escape it on account of
their not being punished immediately. 3 Simon was made sensible of this
by falling under the indignation of the Romans. This rise of his out of
the ground did also occasion the discovery of a great number of others
of the seditious at that time, who had hidden themselves under ground.
But for Simon, he was brought to Caesar in bonds, when he was come back
to that Cesarea which was on the seaside, who gave orders that he should
be kept against that triumph which he was to celebrate at Rome upon this
occasion.






CHAPTER 3.


     How Titus Upon The Celebration Of His Brothers And Fathers
     Birthdays Had Many Of The Jews Slain. Concerning The Danger
     The Jews Were In At Antioch, By Means Of The Transgression
     And Impiety Of One Antiochus, A Jew.

1. While Titus was at Cesarea, he solemnized the birthday of his brother
[Domitian] after a splendid manner, and inflicted a great deal of the
punishment intended for the Jews in honor of him; for the number of
those that were now slain in fighting with the beasts, and were burnt,
and fought with one another, exceeded two thousand five hundred. Yet did
all this seem to the Romans, when they were thus destroyed ten thousand
several ways, to be a punishment beneath their deserts. After this
Caesar came to Berytus, 4 which is a city of Phoenicia, and a Roman
colony, and staid there a longer time, and exhibited a still more
pompous solemnity about his father's birthday, both in the magnificence
of the shows, and in the other vast expenses he was at in his devices
thereto belonging; so that a great multitude of the captives were here
destroyed after the same manner as before.

2. It happened also about this time, that the Jews who remained at
Antioch were under accusations, and in danger of perishing, from the
disturbances that were raised against them by the Antiochians; and this
both on account of the slanders spread abroad at this time against them,
and on account of what pranks they had played not long before; which
I am obliged to describe without fail, though briefly, that I may the
better connect my narration of future actions with those that went
before.

3. For as the Jewish nation is widely dispersed over all the habitable
earth among its inhabitants, so it is very much intermingled with
Syria by reason of its neighborhood, and had the greatest multitudes in
Antioch by reason of the largeness of the city, wherein the kings, after
Antiochus, had afforded them a habitation with the most undisturbed
tranquillity; for though Antiochus, who was called Epiphanes, laid
Jerusalem waste, and spoiled the temple, yet did those that succeeded
him in the kingdom restore all the donations that were made of brass to
the Jews of Antioch, and dedicated them to their synagogue, and granted
them the enjoyment of equal privileges of citizens with the Greeks
themselves; and as the succeeding kings treated them after the same
manner, they both multiplied to a great number, and adorned their temple
gloriously by fine ornaments, and with great magnificence, in the use of
what had been given them. They also made proselytes of a great many of
the Greeks perpetually, and thereby after a sort brought them to be
a portion of their own body. But about this time when the present war
began, and Vespasian was newly sailed to Syria, and all men had taken
up a great hatred against the Jews, then it was that a certain person,
whose name was Antiochus, being one of the Jewish nation, and greatly
respected on account of his father, who was governor of the Jews at
Antioch 5 came upon the theater at a time when the people of Antioch
were assembled together, and became an informer against his father, and
accused both him and others that they had resolved to burn the whole
city in one night; he also delivered up to them some Jews that were
foreigners, as partners in their resolutions. When the people heard
this, they could not refrain their passion, but commanded that those
who were delivered up to them should have fire brought to burn them, who
were accordingly all burnt upon the theater immediately. They did also
fall violently upon the multitude of the Jews, as supposing that
by punishing them suddenly they should save their own city. As for
Antiochus, he aggravated the rage they were in, and thought to give them
a demonstration of his own conversion, arm of his hatred of the Jewish
customs, by sacrificing after the manner of the Greeks; he persuaded
the rest also to compel them to do the same, because they would by that
means discover who they were that had plotted against them, since they
would not do so; and when the people of Antioch tried the experiment,
some few complied, but those that would not do so were slain. As for
Antiochus himself, he obtained soldiers from the Roman commander, and
became a severe master over his own citizens, not permitting them to
rest on the seventh day, but forcing them to do all that they usually
did on other days; and to that degree of distress did he reduce them in
this matter, that the rest of the seventh day was dissolved not only at
Antioch, but the same thing which took thence its rise was done in other
cities also, in like manner, for some small time.

4. Now, after these misfortunes had happened to the Jews at Antioch, a
second calamity befell them, the description of which when we were going
about we premised the account foregoing; for upon this accident, whereby
the four-square market-place was burnt down, as well as the archives,
and the place where the public records were preserved, and the royal
palaces, [and it was not without difficulty that the fire was then put
a stop to, which was likely, by the fury wherewith it was carried along,
to have gone over the whole city,] Antiochus accused the Jews as the
occasion of all the mischief that was done. Now this induced the people
of Antioch, who were now under the immediate persuasion, by reason of
the disorder they were in, that this calumny was true, and would have
been under the same persuasion, even though they had not borne
an ill-will at the Jews before, to believe this man's accusation,
especially when they considered what had been done before, and this
to such a degree, that they all fell violently upon those that were
accused, and this, like madmen, in a very furious rage also, even as if
they had seen the Jews in a manner setting fire themselves to the city;
nor was it without difficulty that one Cneius Collegas, the legate,
could prevail with them to permit the affairs to be laid before Caesar;
for as to Cesennius Petus, the president of Syria, Vespasian had already
sent him away; and so it happened that he was not yet come back thither.
But when Collegas had made a careful inquiry into the matter, he found
out the truth, and that not one of those Jews that were accused by
Antiochus had any hand in it, but that all was done by some vile persons
greatly in debt, who supposed that if they could once set fire to the
market-place, and burn the public records, they should have no further
demands made upon them. So the Jews were under great disorder and
terror, in the uncertain expectations of what would be the upshot of
these accusations against them.






CHAPTER 4.


     How Vespasian Was Received At Rome; As Also How The Germans
     Revolted From The Romans, But Were Subdued. That The
     Sarmatians Overran Mysia, But Were Compelled To Retire To
     Their Own Country Again.

1. And now Titus Caesar, upon the news that was brought him concerning
his father, that his coming was much desired by all the Italian cities,
and that Rome especially received him with great alacrity and splendor,
betook himself to rejoicing and pleasures to a great degree, as now
freed from the solicitude he had been under, after the most agreeable
manner. For all men that were in Italy showed their respects to him
in their minds before he came thither, as if he were already come, as
esteeming the very expectation they had of him to be his real presence,
on account of the great desires they had to see him, and because the
good-will they bore him was entirely free and unconstrained; for it was,
desirable thing to the senate, who well remembered the calamities they
had undergone in the late changes of their governors, to receive a
governor who was adorned with the gravity of old age, and with the
highest skill in the actions of war, whose advancement would be, as they
knew, for nothing else but for the preservation of those that were to
be governed. Moreover, the people had been so harassed by their civil
miseries, that they were still more earnest for his coming immediately,
as supposing they should then be firmly delivered from their calamities,
and believed they should then recover their secure tranquillity and
prosperity; and for the soldiery, they had the principal regard to him,
for they were chiefly apprized of his great exploits in war; and since
they had experienced the want of skill and want of courage in other
commanders, they were very desirous to be free from that great shame
they had undergone by their means, and heartily wished to receive such
a prince as might be a security and an ornament to them. And as this
good-will to Vespasian was universal, those that enjoyed any remarkable
dignities could not have patience enough to stay in Rome, but made haste
to meet him at a very great distance from it; nay, indeed, none of the
rest could endure the delay of seeing him, but did all pour out of the
city in such crowds, and were so universally possessed with the opinion
that it was easier and better for them to go out than to stay there,
that this was the very first time that the city joyfully perceived
itself almost empty of its citizens; for those that staid within were
fewer than those that went out. But as soon as the news was come that he
was hard by, and those that had met him at first related with what good
humor he received every one that came to him, then it was that the whole
multitude that had remained in the city, with their wives and children,
came into the road, and waited for him there; and for those whom he
passed by, they made all sorts of acclamations, on account of the joy
they had to see him, and the pleasantness of his countenance, and styled
him their Benefactor and Savior, and the only person who was worthy to
be ruler of the city of Rome. And now the city was like a temple, full
of garlands and sweet odors; nor was it easy for him to come to the
royal palace, for the multitude of the people that stood about him,
where yet at last he performed his sacrifices of thanksgiving to his
household gods for his safe return to the city. The multitude did also
betake themselves to feasting; which feasts and drink-offerings they
celebrated by their tribes, and their families, and their neighborhoods,
and still prayed God to grant that Vespasian, his sons, and all their
posterity, might continue in the Roman government for a very long time,
and that his dominion might be preserved from all opposition. And this
was the manner in which Rome so joyfully received Vespasian, and thence
grew immediately into a state of great prosperity.

2. But before this time, and while Vespasian was about Alexandria, and
Titus was lying at the siege of Jerusalem, a great multitude of the
Germans were in commotion, and tended to rebellion; and as the Gauls in
their neighborhood joined with them, they conspired together, and had
thereby great hopes of success, and that they should free themselves
from the dominion of the Romans. The motives that induced the Germans to
this attempt for a revolt, and for beginning the war, were these: In
the first place, the nature [of the people], which was destitute of just
reasonings, and ready to throw themselves rashly into danger, upon small
hopes; in the next place, the hatred they bore to those that were their
governors, while their nation had never been conscious of subjection
to any but to the Romans, and that by compulsion only. Besides these
motives, it was the opportunity that now offered itself, which above
all the rest prevailed with them so to do; for when they saw the Roman
government in a great internal disorder, by the continual changes of its
rulers, and understood that every part of the habitable earth under them
was in an unsettled and tottering condition, they thought this was
the best opportunity that could afford itself for themselves to make a
sedition, when the state of the Romans was so ill. Classicus 6 also,
and Vitellius, two of their commanders, puffed them up with such hopes.
These had for a long time been openly desirous of such an innovation,
and were induced by the present opportunity to venture upon the
declaration of their sentiments; the multitude was also ready; and when
these men told them of what they intended to attempt, that news was
gladly received by them. So when a great part of the Germans had agreed
to rebel, and the rest were no better disposed, Vespasian, as guided by
Divine Providence, sent letters to Petilius Cerealis, who had formerly
had the command of Germany, whereby he declared him to have the dignity
of consul, and commanded him to take upon him the government of Britain;
so he went whither he was ordered to go, and when he was informed of
the revolt of the Germans, he fell upon them as soon as they were gotten
together, and put his army in battle-array, and slew a great number of
them in the fight, and forced them to leave off their madness, and to
grow wiser; nay, had he not fallen thus suddenly upon them on the
place, it had not been long ere they would however have been brought
to punishment; for as soon as ever the news of their revolt was come to
Rome, and Caesar Domitian was made acquainted with it, he made no delay,
even at that his age, when he was exceeding young, but undertook this
weighty affair. He had a courageous mind from his father, and had
made greater improvements than belonged to such an age: accordingly
he marched against the barbarians immediately; whereupon their hearts
failed them at the very rumor of his approach, and they submitted
themselves to him with fear, and thought it a happy thing that they
were brought under their old yoke again without suffering any further
mischiefs. When therefore Domitian had settled all the affairs of Gaul
in such good order, that it would not be easily put into disorder any
more, he returned to Rome with honor and glory, as having performed such
exploits as were above his own age, but worthy of so great a father.

3. At the very same time with the forementioned revolt of the Germans
did the bold attempt of the Scythians against the Romans occur; for
those Scythians who are called Sarmatians, being a very numerous
people, transported themselves over the Danube into Mysia, without
being perceived; after which, by their violence, and entirely unexpected
assault, they slew a great many of the Romans that guarded the
frontiers; and as the consular legate Fonteius Agrippa came to meet
them, and fought courageously against them, he was slain by them. They
then overran all the region that had been subject to him, tearing and
rending every thing that fell in their way. But when Vespasian was
informed of what had happened, and how Mysia was laid waste, he sent
away Rubrius Gallus to punish these Sarmatians; by whose means many of
them perished in the battles he fought against them, and that part which
escaped fled with fear to their own country. So when this general
had put an end to the war, he provided for the future security of the
country also; for he placed more and more numerous garrisons in the
place, till he made it altogether impossible for the barbarians to
pass over the river any more. And thus had this war in Mysia a sudden
conclusion.






CHAPTER V.


     Concerning The Sabbatic River Which Titus Saw As He Was
     Journeying Through Syria; And How The People Of Antioch Came
     With A Petition To Titus Against The Jews But Were Rejected
     By Him; As Also Concerning Titus's And Vespasian's Triumph.

1. Now Titus Caesar tarried some time at Berytus, as we told you before.
He thence removed, and exhibited magnificent shows in all those cities
of Syria through which he went, and made use of the captive Jews as
public instances of the destruction of that nation. He then saw a
river as he went along, of such a nature as deserves to be recorded in
history; it runs in the middle between Arcea, belonging to Agrippa's
kingdom, and Raphanea. It hath somewhat very peculiar in it; for when
it runs, its current is strong, and has plenty of water; after which its
springs fail for six days together, and leave its channel dry, as any
one may see; after which days it runs on the seventh day as it did
before, and as though it had undergone no change at all; it hath also
been observed to keep this order perpetually and exactly; whence it is
that they call it the Sabbatic River 7 that name being taken from the
sacred seventh day among the Jews.

2. But when the people of Antioch were informed that Titus was
approaching, they were so glad at it, that they could not keep within
their walls, but hasted away to give him the meeting; nay, they
proceeded as far as thirty furlongs, and more, with that intention.
These were not the men only, but a multitude of women also with their
children did the same; and when they saw him coming up to them, they
stood on both sides of the way, and stretched out their right hands,
saluting him, and making all sorts of acclamations to him, and turned
back together with him. They also, among all the acclamations they made
to him, besought him all the way they went to eject the Jews out of
their city; yet did not Titus at all yield to this their petition, but
gave them the bare hearing of it quietly. However, the Jews were in a
great deal of terrible fear, under the uncertainty they were in what
his opinion was, and what he would do to them. For Titus did not stay
at Antioch, but continued his progress immediately to Zeugma, which lies
upon the Euphrates, whither came to him messengers from Vologeses king
of Parthia, and brought him a crown of gold upon the victory he had
gained over the Jews; which he accepted of, and feasted the king's
messengers, and then came back to Antioch. And when the senate and
people of Antioch earnestly entreated him to come upon their theater,
where their whole multitude was assembled, and expected him, he complied
with great humanity; but when they pressed him with much earnestness,
and continually begged of him that he would eject the Jews out of their
city, he gave them this very pertinent answer: "How can this be done,
since that country of theirs, whither the Jews must be obliged then to
retire, is destroyed, and no place will receive them besides?" Whereupon
the people of Antioch, when they had failed of success in this their
first request, made him a second; for they desired that he would order
those tables of brass to be removed on which the Jews' privileges were
engraven. However, Titus would not grant that neither, but permitted the
Jews of Antioch to continue to enjoy the very same privileges in that
city which they had before, and then departed for Egypt; and as he came
to Jerusalem in his progress, and compared the melancholy condition he
saw it then in, with the ancient glory of the city, and called to mind
the greatness of its present ruins, as well as its ancient splendor,
he could not but pity the destruction of the city, so far was he from
boasting that so great and goodly a city as that was had been by him
taken by force; nay, he frequently cursed those that had been the
authors of their revolt, and had brought such a punishment upon the
city; insomuch that it openly appeared that he did not desire that
such a calamity as this punishment of theirs amounted to should be a
demonstration of his courage. Yet was there no small quantity of the
riches that had been in that city still found among its ruins, a great
deal of which the Romans dug up; but the greatest part was discovered
by those who were captives, and so they carried it away; I mean the gold
and the silver, and the rest of that most precious furniture which the
Jews had, and which the owners had treasured up under ground, against
the uncertain fortunes of war.

3. So Titus took the journey he intended into Egypt, and passed over the
desert very suddenly, and came to Alexandria, and took up a resolution
to go to Rome by sea. And as he was accompanied by two legions, he sent
each of them again to the places whence they had before come; the fifth
he sent to Mysia, and the fifteenth to Pannonia: as for the leaders of
the captives, Simon and John, with the other seven hundred men, whom
he had selected out of the rest as being eminently tall and handsome
of body, he gave order that they should be soon carried to Italy,
as resolving to produce them in his triumph. So when he had had a
prosperous voyage to his mind, the city of Rome behaved itself in his
reception, and their meeting him at a distance, as it did in the case
of his father. But what made the most splendid appearance in Titus's
opinion was, when his father met him, and received him; but still the
multitude of the citizens conceived the greatest joy when they saw
them all three together, 8 as they did at this time; nor were many days
overpast when they determined to have but one triumph, that should be
common to both of them, on account of the glorious exploits they had
performed, although the senate had decreed each of them a separate
triumph by himself. So when notice had been given beforehand of the day
appointed for this pompous solemnity to be made, on account of their
victories, not one of the immense multitude was left in the city, but
every body went out so far as to gain only a station where they might
stand, and left only such a passage as was necessary for those that were
to be seen to go along it.

4. Now all the soldiery marched out beforehand by companies, and in
their several ranks, under their several commanders, in the night time,
and were about the gates, not of the upper palaces, but those near
the temple of Isis; for there it was that the emperors had rested the
foregoing night. And as soon as ever it was day, Vespasian and Titus
came out crowned with laurel, and clothed in those ancient purple habits
which were proper to their family, and then went as far as Octavian's
Walks; for there it was that the senate, and the principal rulers, and
those that had been recorded as of the equestrian order, waited for
them. Now a tribunal had been erected before the cloisters, and ivory
chairs had been set upon it, when they came and sat down upon them.
Whereupon the soldiery made an acclamation of joy to them immediately,
and all gave them attestations of their valor; while they were
themselves without their arms, and only in their silken garments, and
crowned with laurel: then Vespasian accepted of these shouts of theirs;
but while they were still disposed to go on in such acclamations, he
gave them a signal of silence. And when every body entirely held their
peace, he stood up, and covering the greatest part of his head with his
cloak, he put up the accustomed solemn prayers; the like prayers did
Titus put up also; after which prayers Vespasian made a short speech to
all the people, and then sent away the soldiers to a dinner prepared for
them by the emperors. Then did he retire to that gate which was called
the Gate of the Pomp, because pompous shows do always go through that
gate; there it was that they tasted some food, and when they had put on
their triumphal garments, and had offered sacrifices to the gods that
were placed at the gate, they sent the triumph forward, and marched
through the theatres, that they might be the more easily seen by the
multitudes.

5. Now it is impossible to describe the multitude of the shows as they
deserve, and the magnificence of them all; such indeed as a man could
not easily think of as performed, either by the labor of workmen, or
the variety of riches, or the rarities of nature; for almost all such
curiosities as the most happy men ever get by piece-meal were here one
heaped on another, and those both admirable and costly in their nature;
and all brought together on that day demonstrated the vastness of the
dominions of the Romans; for there was here to be seen a mighty quantity
of silver, and gold, and ivory, contrived into all sorts of things, and
did not appear as carried along in pompous show only, but, as a man may
say, running along like a river. Some parts were composed of the rarest
purple hangings, and so carried along; and others accurately represented
to the life what was embroidered by the arts of the Babylonians. There
were also precious stones that were transparent, some set in crowns of
gold, and some in other places, as the workmen pleased; and of these
such a vast number were brought, that we could not but thence learn how
vainly we imagined any of them to be rarities. The images of the gods
were also carried, being as well wonderful for their largeness, as made
very artificially, and with great skill of the workmen; nor were any of
these images of any other than very costly materials; and many species
of animals were brought, every one in their own natural ornaments. The
men also who brought every one of these shows were great multitudes, and
adorned with purple garments, all over interwoven with gold; those that
were chosen for carrying these pompous shows having also about them such
magnificent ornaments as were both extraordinary and surprising. Besides
these, one might see that even the great number of the captives was not
unadorned, while the variety that was in their garments, and their fine
texture, concealed from the sight the deformity of their bodies. But
what afforded the greatest surprise of all was the structure of the
pageants that were borne along; for indeed he that met them could
not but be afraid that the bearers would not be able firmly enough to
support them, such was their magnitude; for many of them were so made,
that they were on three or even four stories, one above another. The
magnificence also of their structure afforded one both pleasure and
surprise; for upon many of them were laid carpets of gold. There
was also wrought gold and ivory fastened about them all; and many
resemblances of the war, and those in several ways, and variety of
contrivances, affording a most lively portraiture of itself. For there
was to be seen a happy country laid waste, and entire squadrons of
enemies slain; while some of them ran away, and some were carried into
captivity; with walls of great altitude and magnitude overthrown and
ruined by machines; with the strongest fortifications taken, and the
walls of most populous cities upon the tops of hills seized on, and
an army pouring itself within the walls; as also every place full of
slaughter, and supplications of the enemies, when they were no longer
able to lift up their hands in way of opposition. Fire also sent upon
temples was here represented, and houses overthrown, and falling upon
their owners: rivers also, after they came out of a large and melancholy
desert, ran down, not into a land cultivated, nor as drink for men, or
for cattle, but through a land still on fire upon every side; for the
Jews related that such a thing they had undergone during this war. Now
the workmanship of these representations was so magnificent and lively
in the construction of the things, that it exhibited what had been done
to such as did not see it, as if they had been there really present. On
the top of every one of these pageants was placed the commander of the
city that was taken, and the manner wherein he was taken. Moreover,
there followed those pageants a great number of ships; and for the other
spoils, they were carried in great plenty. But for those that were taken
in the temple of Jerusalem, 9 they made the greatest figure of them
all; that is, the golden table, of the weight of many talents; the
candlestick also, that was made of gold, though its construction were
now changed from that which we made use of; for its middle shaft was
fixed upon a basis, and the small branches were produced out of it to
a great length, having the likeness of a trident in their position, and
had every one a socket made of brass for a lamp at the tops of them.
These lamps were in number seven, and represented the dignity of the
number seven among the Jews; and the last of all the spoils, was carried
the Law of the Jews. After these spoils passed by a great many men,
carrying the images of Victory, whose structure was entirely either of
ivory or of gold. After which Vespasian marched in the first place,
and Titus followed him; Domitian also rode along with them, and made a
glorious appearance, and rode on a horse that was worthy of admiration.

6. Now the last part of this pompous show was at the temple of Jupiter
Capitolinus, whither when they were come, they stood still; for it was
the Romans' ancient custom to stay till somebody brought the news that
the general of the enemy was slain. This general was Simon, the son of
Gioras, who had then been led in this triumph among the captives; a rope
had also been put upon his head, and he had been drawn into a proper
place in the forum, and had withal been tormented by those that drew him
along; and the law of the Romans required that malefactors condemned to
die should be slain there. Accordingly, when it was related that there
was an end of him, and all the people had set up a shout for joy, they
then began to offer those sacrifices which they had consecrated, in the
prayers used in such solemnities; which when they had finished, they
went away to the palace. And as for some of the spectators, the emperors
entertained them at their own feast; and for all the rest there were
noble preparations made for feasting at home; for this was a festival
day to the city of Rome, as celebrated for the victory obtained by their
army over their enemies, for the end that was now put to their civil
miseries, and for the commencement of their hopes of future prosperity
and happiness.

7. After these triumphs were over, and after the affairs of the Romans
were settled on the surest foundations, Vespasian resolved to build
a temple to Peace, which was finished in so short a time, and in so
glorious a manner, as was beyond all human expectation and opinion: for
he having now by Providence a vast quantity of wealth, besides what he
had formerly gained in his other exploits, he had this temple adorned
with pictures and statues; for in this temple were collected and
deposited all such rarities as men aforetime used to wander all over the
habitable world to see, when they had a desire to see one of them after
another; he also laid up therein those golden vessels and instruments
that were taken out of the Jewish temple, as ensigns of his glory. But
still he gave order that they should lay up their Law, and the purple
veils of the holy place, in the royal palace itself, and keep them
there.






CHAPTER 6.


     Concerning Machaerus, And How Lucilius Bassus Took That
     Citadel, And Other Places.

1. Now Lucilius Bassus was sent as legate into Judea, and there he
received the army from Cerealis Vitellianus, and took that citadel which
was in Herodium, together with the garrison that was in it; after which
he got together all the soldiery that was there, [which was a large
body, but dispersed into several parties,] with the tenth legion, and
resolved to make war upon Machaerus; for it was highly necessary that
this citadel should be demolished, lest it might be a means of drawing
away many into a rebellion, by reason of its strength; for the nature
of the place was very capable of affording the surest hopes of safety to
those that possessed it, as well as delay and fear to those that should
attack it; for what was walled in was itself a very rocky hill, elevated
to a very great height; which circumstance alone made it very hard to be
subdued. It was also so contrived by nature, that it could not be easily
ascended; for it is, as it were, ditched about with such valleys on all
sides, and to such a depth, that the eye cannot reach their bottoms,
and such as are not easily to be passed over, and even such as it is
impossible to fill up with earth. For that valley which cuts it on the
west extends to threescore furlongs, and did not end till it came to the
lake Asphaltites; on the same side it was also that Machaerus had
the tallest top of its hill elevated above the rest. But then for the
valleys that lay on the north and south sides, although they be not
so large as that already described, yet it is in like manner an
impracticable thing to think of getting over them; and for the valley
that lies on the east side, its depth is found to be no less than a
hundred cubits. It extends as far as a mountain that lies over against
Machaerus, with which it is bounded.

2. Now when Alexander [Janneus], the king of the Jews, observed the
nature of this place, he was the first who built a citadel here,
which afterwards was demolished by Gabinius, when he made war against
Aristobulus. But when Herod came to be king, he thought the place to
be worthy of the utmost regard, and of being built upon in the firmest
manner, and this especially because it lay so near to Arabia; for it is
seated in a convenient place on that account, and hath a prospect toward
that country; he therefore surrounded a large space of ground with walls
and towers, and built a city there, out of which city there was a way
that led up to the very citadel itself on the top of the mountain; nay,
more than this, he built a wall round that top of the hill, and erected
towers at the corners, of a hundred and sixty cubits high; in the middle
of which place he built a palace, after a magnificent manner, wherein
were large and beautiful edifices. He also made a great many reservoirs
for the reception of water, that there might be plenty of it ready
for all uses, and those in the properest places that were afforded him
there. Thus did he, as it were, contend with the nature of the place,
that he might exceed its natural strength and security [which yet itself
rendered it hard to be taken] by those fortifications which were made by
the hands of men. Moreover, he put a large quantity of darts and other
machines of war into it, and contrived to get every thing thither that
might any way contribute to its inhabitants' security, under the longest
siege possible.

3. Now within this place there grew a sort of rue 10 that deserves our
wonder on account of its largeness, for it was no way inferior to any
fig tree whatsoever, either in height or in thickness; and the report
is, that it had lasted ever since the times of Herod, and would probably
have lasted much longer, had it not been cut down by those Jews who
took possession of the place afterward. But still in that valley which
encompasses the city on the north side there is a certain place called
Baaras, which produces a root of the same name with itself 11 its
color is like to that of flame, and towards the evenings it sends out a
certain ray like lightning. It is not easily taken by such as would
do it, but recedes from their hands, nor will yield itself to be taken
quietly, until either the urine of a woman, or her menstrual blood, be
poured upon it; nay, even then it is certain death to those that touch
it, unless any one take and hang the root itself down from his hand,
and so carry it away. It may also be taken another way, without danger,
which is this: they dig a trench quite round about it, till the hidden
part of the root be very small, they then tie a dog to it, and when the
dog tries hard to follow him that tied him, this root is easily plucked
up, but the dog dies immediately, as if it were instead of the man that
would take the plant away; nor after this need any one be afraid of
taking it into their hands. Yet, after all this pains in getting, it
is only valuable on account of one virtue it hath, that if it be only
brought to sick persons, it quickly drives away those called demons,
which are no other than the spirits of the wicked, that enter into men
that are alive and kill them, unless they can obtain some help against
them. Here are also fountains of hot water, that flow out of this place,
which have a very different taste one from the other; for some of them
are bitter, and others of them are plainly sweet. Here are also many
eruptions of cold waters, and this not only in the places that lie
lower, and have their fountains near one another, but, what is still
more wonderful, here is to be seen a certain cave hard by, whose cavity
is not deep, but it is covered over by a rock that is prominent; above
this rock there stand up two [hills or] breasts, as it were, but a
little distant one from another, the one of which sends out a fountain
that is very cold, and the other sends out one that is very hot; which
waters, when they are mingled together, compose a most pleasant bath;
they are medicinal indeed for other maladies, but especially good for
strengthening the nerves. This place has in it also mines of sulfur and
alum.

4. Now when Bassus had taken a full view of this place, he resolved to
besiege it, by filling up the valley that lay on the east side; so he
fell hard to work, and took great pains to raise his banks as soon as
possible, and by that means to render the siege easy. As for the Jews
that were caught in this place, they separated themselves from the
strangers that were with them, and they forced those strangers, as an
otherwise useless multitude, to stay in the lower part of the city, and
undergo the principal dangers, while they themselves seized on the upper
citadel, and held it, and this both on account of its strength, and to
provide for their own safety. They also supposed they might obtain their
pardon, in case they should [at last] surrender the citadel. However,
they were willing to make trial, in the first place, whether the
hopes they had of avoiding a siege would come to any thing; with which
intention they made sallies every day, and fought with those that met
them; in which conflicts they were many of them slain, as they therein
slew many of the Romans. But still it was the opportunities that
presented themselves which chiefly gained both sides their victories;
these were gained by the Jews, when they fell upon the Romans as they
were off their guard; but by the Romans, when, upon the others' sallies
against their banks, they foresaw their coming, and were upon their
guard when they received them. But the conclusion of this siege did
not depend upon these bickerings; but a certain surprising accident,
relating to what was done in this siege, forced the Jews to surrender
the citadel. There was a certain young man among the besieged, of great
boldness, and very active of his hand, his name was Eleazar; he greatly
signalized himself in those sallies, and encouraged the Jews to go out
in great numbers, in order to hinder the raising of the banks, and did
the Romans a vast deal of mischief when they came to fighting; he so
managed matters, that those who sallied out made their attacks easily,
and returned back without danger, and this by still bringing up the rear
himself. Now it happened that, on a certain time, when the fight was
over, and both sides were parted, and retired home, he, in way of
contempt of the enemy, and thinking that none of them would begin the
fight again at that time, staid without the gates, and talked with those
that were upon the wall, and his mind was wholly intent upon what they
said. Now a certain person belonging to the Roman camp, whose name was
Rufus, by birth an Egyptian, ran upon him suddenly, when nobody expected
such a thing, and carried him off, with his armor itself; while, in the
mean time, those that saw it from the wall were under such an amazement,
that Rufus prevented their assistance, and carried Eleazar to the Roman
camp. So the general of the Romans ordered that he should be taken up
naked, set before the city to be seen, and sorely whipped before their
eyes. Upon this sad accident that befell the young man, the Jews were
terribly confounded, and the city, with one voice, sorely lamented him,
and the mourning proved greater than could well be supposed upon the
calamity of a single person. When Bassus perceived that, he began
to think of using a stratagem against the enemy, and was desirous to
aggravate their grief, in order to prevail with them to surrender the
city for the preservation of that man. Nor did he fail of his hope; for
he commanded them to set up a cross, as if he were just going to hang
Eleazar upon it immediately; the sight of this occasioned a sore grief
among those that were in the citadel, and they groaned vehemently, and
cried out that they could not bear to see him thus destroyed. Whereupon
Eleazar besought them not to disregard him, now he was going to suffer a
most miserable death, and exhorted them to save themselves, by yielding
to the Roman power and good fortune, since all other people were now
conquered by them. These men were greatly moved with what he said, there
being also many within the city that interceded for him, because he was
of an eminent and very numerous family; so they now yielded to their
passion of commiseration, contrary to their usual custom. Accordingly,
they sent out immediately certain messengers, and treated with the
Romans, in order to a surrender of the citadel to them, and desired that
they might be permitted to go away, and take Eleazar along with them.
Then did the Romans and their general accept of these terms; while the
multitude of strangers that were in the lower part of the city, hearing
of the agreement that was made by the Jews for themselves alone, were
resolved to fly away privately in the night time; but as soon as they
had opened their gates, those that had come to terms with Bassus told
him of it; whether it were that they envied the others' deliverance,
or whether it were done out of fear, lest an occasion should be taken
against them upon their escape, is uncertain. The most courageous,
therefore, of those men that went out prevented the enemy, and got away,
and fled for it; but for those men that were caught within they were
slain to the number of one thousand seven hundred, as were the women and
children made slaves. But as Bassus thought he must perform the covenant
he had made with those that surrendered the citadel, he let them go, and
restored Eleazar to them.

5. When Bassus had settled these affairs, he marched hastily to the
forest of Jarden, as it is called; for he had heard that a great many
of those that had fled from Jerusalem and Machaerus formerly were there
gotten together. When he was therefore come to the place, and understood
that the former news was no mistake, he, in the first place, surrounded
the whole place with his horsemen, that such of the Jews as had boldness
enough to try to break through might have no way possible for escaping,
by reason of the situation of these horsemen; and for the footmen, he
ordered them to cut down the trees that were in the wood whither
they were fled. So the Jews were under a necessity of performing some
glorious exploit, and of greatly exposing themselves in a battle, since
they might perhaps thereby escape. So they made a general attack, and
with a great shout fell upon those that surrounded them, who received
them with great courage; and so while the one side fought desperately,
and the others would not yield, the fight was prolonged on that account.
But the event of the battle did not answer the expectation of the
assailants; for so it happened, that no more than twelve fell on the
Roman side, with a few that were wounded; but not one of the Jews
escaped out of this battle, but they were all killed, being in the whole
not fewer in number than three thousand, together with Judas, the son
of Jairus, their general, concerning whom we have before spoken, that he
had been a captain of a certain band at the siege of Jerusalem, and by
going down into a certain vault under ground, had privately made his
escape.

6. About the same time it was that Caesar sent a letter to Bassus, and
to Liberius Maximus, who was the procurator [of Judea], and gave order
that all Judea should be exposed to sale 12 for he did not found any
city there, but reserved the country for himself. However, he assigned
a place for eight hundred men only, whom he had dismissed from his army,
which he gave them for their habitation; it is called Emmaus, 13 and is
distant from Jerusalem threescore furlongs. He also laid a tribute upon
the Jews wheresoever they were, and enjoined every one of them to bring
two drachmae every year into the Capitol, as they used to pay the same
to the temple at Jerusalem. And this was the state of the Jewish affairs
at this time.






CHAPTER 7.


     Concerning The Calamity That Befell Antiochus, King Of
     Commagene. As Also Concerning The Alans And What Great
     Mischiefs They Did To The Medes And Armenians.

1. And now, in the fourth year of the reign of Vespasian, it came to
pass that Antiochus, the king of Commagene, with all his family, fell
into very great calamities. The occasion was this: Cesennius Petus, who
was president of Syria at this time, whether it were done out of regard
to truth, or whether out of hatred to Antiochus, [for which was the real
motive was never thoroughly discovered,] sent an epistle to Caesar, and
therein told him that Antiochus, with his son Epiphanes, had resolved to
rebel against the Romans, and had made a league with the king of Parthia
to that purpose; that it was therefore fit to prevent them, lest they
prevent us, and begin such a war as may cause a general disturbance in
the Roman empire. Now Caesar was disposed to take some care about the
matter, since this discovery was made; for the neighborhood of the
kingdoms made this affair worthy of greater regard; for Samoseta, the
capital of Commagene, lies upon Euphrates, and upon any such design
could afford an easy passage over it to the Parthians, and could also
afford them a secure reception. Petus was accordingly believed, and had
authority given him of doing what he should think proper in the case; so
he set about it without delay, and fell upon Commagene before Antiochus
and his people had the least expectation of his coming: he had with him
the tenth legion, as also some cohorts and troops of horsemen. These
kings also came to his assistance: Aristobulus, king of the country
called Chalcidene, and Sohemus, who was called king of Emesa. Nor was
there any opposition made to his forces when they entered the kingdom;
for no one of that country would so much as lift up his hand against
them. When Antiochus heard this unexpected news, he could not think in
the least of making war with the Romans, but determined to leave his
whole kingdom in the state wherein it now was, and to retire privately,
with his wife and children, as thinking thereby to demonstrate himself
to the Romans to be innocent as to the accusation laid against him. So
he went away from that city as far as a hundred and twenty furlongs,
into a plain, and there pitched his tents.

2. Petus then sent some of his men to seize upon Samosate, and by their
means took possession of that city, while he went himself to attack
Antiochus with the rest of his army. However, the king was not prevailed
upon by the distress he was in to do any thing in the way of war against
the Romans, but bemoaned his own hard fate, and endured with patience
what he was not able to prevent. But his sons, who were young, and
unexperienced in war, but of strong bodies, were not easily induced
to bear this calamity without fighting. Epiphanes, therefore, and
Callinicus, betook themselves to military force; and as the battle was a
sore one, and lasted all the day long, they showed their own valor in
a remarkable manner, and nothing but the approach of night put a period
thereto, and that without any diminution of their forces; yet would
not Antiochus, upon this conclusion of the fight, continue there by any
means, but took his wife and his daughters, and fled away with them
to Cilicia, and by so doing quite discouraged the minds of his own
soldiers. Accordingly, they revolted, and went over to the Romans, out
of the despair they were in of his keeping the kingdom; and his case was
looked upon by all as quite desperate. It was therefore necessary that
Epiphanes and his soldiers should get clear of their enemies before they
became entirely destitute of any confederates; nor were there any more
than ten horsemen with him, who passed with him over Euphrates, whence
they went undisturbed to Vologeses, the king of Parthia, where they were
not disregarded as fugitives, but had the same respect paid them as if
they had retained their ancient prosperity.

3. Now when Antiochus was come to Tarsus in Cilicia, Petus ordered
a centurion to go to him, and send him in bonds to Rome. However,
Vespasian could not endure to have a king brought to him in that manner,
but thought it fit rather to have a regard to the ancient friendship
that had been between them, than to preserve an inexorable anger upon
pretense of this war. Accordingly, he gave orders that they should take
off his bonds, while he was still upon the road, and that he should not
come to Rome, but should now go and live at Lacedemon; he also gave him
large revenues, that he might not only live in plenty, but like a king
also. When Epiphanes, who before was in great fear for his father, was
informed of this, their minds were freed from that great and almost
incurable concern they had been under. He also hoped that Caesar would
be reconciled to them, upon the intercession of Vologeses; for although
he lived in plenty, he knew not how to bear living out of the Roman
empire. So Caesar gave him leave, after an obliging manner, and he came
to Rome; and as his father came quickly to him from Lacedemon, he had
all sorts of respect paid him there, and there he remained.

4. Now there was a nation of the Alans, which we have formerly mentioned
some where as being Scythians and inhabiting at the lake Meotis. This
nation about this time laid a design of falling upon Media, and the
parts beyond it, in order to plunder them; with which intention they
treated with the king of Hyrcania; for he was master of that passage
which king Alexander [the Great] shut up with iron gates. This king gave
them leave to come through them; so they came in great multitudes, and
fell upon the Medes unexpectedly, and plundered their country, which
they found full of people, and replenished with abundance of cattle,
while nobody durst make any resistance against them; for Paeorus, the
king of the country, had fled away for fear into places where they could
not easily come at him, and had yielded up every thing he had to them,
and had only saved his wife and his concubines from them, and that with
difficulty also, after they had been made captives, by giving them a
hundred talents for their ransom. These Alans therefore plundered the
country without opposition, and with great ease, and proceeded as far
as Armenia, laying all waste before them. Now Tiridates was king of that
country, who met them, and fought them, but had like to have been taken
alive in the battle; for a certain man threw a net over him from a great
distance, and had soon drawn him to him, unless he had immediately cut
the cord with his sword, and ran away, and prevented it. So the Alans,
being still more provoked by this sight, laid waste the country, and
drove a great multitude of the men, and a great quantity of the other
prey they had gotten out of both kingdoms, along with them, and then
retreated back to their own country.






CHAPTER 8.


     Concerning Masada And Those Sicarii Who Kept It; And How
     Silva Betook Himself To Form The Siege Of That Citadel.
     Eleazar's Speeches To The Besieged.

1. When Bassus was dead in Judea, Flavius Silva succeeded him as
procurator there; who, when he saw that all the rest of the country was
subdued in this war, and that there was but one only strong hold
that was still in rebellion, he got all his army together that lay in
different places, and made an expedition against it. This fortress was
called Masada. It was one Eleazar, a potent man, and the commander of
these Sicarii, that had seized upon it. He was a descendant from that
Judas who had persuaded abundance of the Jews, as we have formerly
related, not to submit to the taxation when Cyrenius was sent into Judea
to make one; for then it was that the Sicarii got together against
those that were willing to submit to the Romans, and treated them in all
respects as if they had been their enemies, both by plundering them
of what they had, by driving away their cattle, and by setting fire
to their houses; for they said that they differed not at all from
foreigners, by betraying, in so cowardly a manner, that freedom which
Jews thought worthy to be contended for to the utmost, and by owning
that they preferred slavery under the Romans before such a contention.
Now this was in reality no better than a pretense and a cloak for the
barbarity which was made use of by them, and to color over their own
avarice, which they afterwards made evident by their own actions; for
those that were partners with them in their rebellion joined also with
them in the war against the Romans, and went further lengths with them
in their impudent undertakings against them; and when they were again
convicted of dissembling in such their pretenses, they still more abused
those that justly reproached them for their wickedness. And indeed that
was a time most fertile in all manner of wicked practices, insomuch that
no kind of evil deeds were then left undone; nor could any one so much
as devise any bad thing that was new, so deeply were they all infected,
and strove with one another in their single capacity, and in their
communities, who should run the greatest lengths in impiety towards
God, and in unjust actions towards their neighbors; the men of power
oppressing the multitude, and the multitude earnestly laboring to
destroy the men of power. The one part were desirous of tyrannizing over
others, and the rest of offering violence to others, and of plundering
such as were richer than themselves. They were the Sicarii who first
began these transgressions, and first became barbarous towards those
allied to them, and left no words of reproach unsaid, and no works of
perdition untried, in order to destroy those whom their contrivances
affected. Yet did John demonstrate by his actions that these Sicarii
were more moderate than he was himself, for he not only slew all such
as gave him good counsel to do what was right, but treated them worst of
all, as the most bitter enemies that he had among all the Citizens; nay,
he filled his entire country with ten thousand instances of wickedness,
such as a man who was already hardened sufficiently in his impiety
towards God would naturally do; for the food was unlawful that was set
upon his table, and he rejected those purifications that the law of his
country had ordained; so that it was no longer a wonder if he, who
was so mad in his impiety towards God, did not observe any rules of
gentleness and common affection towards men. Again, therefore, what
mischief was there which Simon the son of Gioras did not do? or what
kind of abuses did he abstain from as to those very free-men who had set
him up for a tyrant? What friendship or kindred were there that did not
make him more bold in his daily murders? for they looked upon the doing
of mischief to strangers only as a work beneath their courage, but
thought their barbarity towards their nearest relations would be a
glorious demonstration thereof. The Idumeans also strove with these
men who should be guilty of the greatest madness! for they [all], vile
wretches as they were, cut the throats of the high priests, that so
no part of a religious regard to God might be preserved; they
thence proceeded to destroy utterly the least remains of a political
government, and introduced the most complete scene of iniquity in all
instances that were practicable; under which scene that sort of people
that were called zealots grew up, and who indeed corresponded to
the name; for they imitated every wicked work; nor, if their memory
suggested any evil thing that had formerly been done, did they avoid
zealously to pursue the same; and although they gave themselves that
name from their zeal for what was good, yet did it agree to them only
by way of irony, on account of those they had unjustly treated by their
wild and brutish disposition, or as thinking the greatest mischiefs to
be the greatest good. Accordingly, they all met with such ends as God
deservedly brought upon them in way of punishment; for all such miseries
have been sent upon them as man's nature is capable of undergoing,
till the utmost period of their lives, and till death came upon them
in various ways of torment; yet might one say justly that they suffered
less than they had done, because it was impossible they could be
punished according to their deserving. But to make a lamentation
according to the deserts of those who fell under these men's barbarity,
this is not a proper place for it;--I therefore now return again to the
remaining part of the present narration.

2. For now it was that the Roman general came, and led his army against
Eleazar and those Sicarii who held the fortress Masada together with
him; and for the whole country adjoining, he presently gained it, and
put garrisons into the most proper places of it; he also built a wall
quite round the entire fortress, that none of the besieged might easily
escape; he also set his men to guard the several parts of it; he also
pitched his camp in such an agreeable place as he had chosen for the
siege, and at which place the rock belonging to the fortress did make
the nearest approach to the neighboring mountain, which yet was a place
of difficulty for getting plenty of provisions; for it was not only food
that was to be brought from a great distance [to the army], and this
with a great deal of pain to those Jews who were appointed for that
purpose, but water was also to be brought to the camp, because the place
afforded no fountain that was near it. When therefore Silva had ordered
these affairs beforehand, he fell to besieging the place; which siege
was likely to stand in need of a great deal of skill and pains, by
reason of the strength of the fortress, the nature of which I will now
describe.

3. There was a rock, not small in circumference, and very high. It was
encompassed with valleys of such vast depth downward, that the eye could
not reach their bottoms; they were abrupt, and such as no animal could
walk upon, excepting at two places of the rock, where it subsides, in
order to afford a passage for ascent, though not without difficulty.
Now, of the ways that lead to it, one is that from the lake Asphaltites,
towards the sun-rising, and another on the west, where the ascent is
easier: the one of these ways is called the Serpent, as resembling that
animal in its narrowness and its perpetual windings; for it is broken
off at the prominent precipices of the rock, and returns frequently into
itself, and lengthening again by little and little, hath much ado to
proceed forward; and he that would walk along it must first go on one
leg, and then on the other; there is also nothing but destruction, in
case your feet slip; for on each side there is a vastly deep chasm and
precipice, sufficient to quell the courage of every body by the terror
it infuses into the mind. When, therefore, a man hath gone along this
way for thirty furlongs, the rest is the top of the hill--not ending at
a small point, but is no other than a plain upon the highest part of the
mountain. Upon this top of the hill, Jonathan the high priest first of
all built a fortress, and called it Masada: after which the rebuilding
of this place employed the care of king Herod to a great degree; he
also built a wall round about the entire top of the hill, seven furlongs
long; it was composed of white stone; its height was twelve, and
its breadth eight cubits; there were also erected upon that wall
thirty-eight towers, each of them fifty cubits high; out of which you
might pass into lesser edifices, which were built on the inside, round
the entire wall; for the king reserved the top of the hill, which was of
a fat soil, and better mould than any valley for agriculture, that such
as committed themselves to this fortress for their preservation might
not even there be quite destitute of food, in case they should ever be
in want of it from abroad. Moreover, he built a palace therein at the
western ascent; it was within and beneath the walls of the citadel, but
inclined to its north side. Now the wall of this palace was very high
and strong, and had at its four corners towers sixty cubits high. The
furniture also of the edifices, and of the cloisters, and of the
baths, was of great variety, and very costly; and these buildings were
supported by pillars of single stones on every side; the walls and also
the floors of the edifices were paved with stones of several colors. He
also had cut many and great pits, as reservoirs for water, out of the
rocks, at every one of the places that were inhabited, both above and
round about the palace, and before the wall; and by this contrivance
he endeavored to have water for several uses, as if there had been
fountains there. Here was also a road digged from the palace, and
leading to the very top of the mountain, which yet could not be seen by
such as were without [the walls]; nor indeed could enemies easily
make use of the plain roads; for the road on the east side, as we have
already taken notice, could not be walked upon, by reason of its nature;
and for the western road, he built a large tower at its narrowest place,
at no less a distance from the top of the hill than a thousand cubits;
which tower could not possibly be passed by, nor could it be easily
taken; nor indeed could those that walked along it without any fear
[such was its contrivance] easily get to the end of it; and after such
a manner was this citadel fortified, both by nature and by the hands of
men, in order to frustrate the attacks of enemies.

4. As for the furniture that was within this fortress, it was still more
wonderful on account of its splendor and long continuance; for here was
laid up corn in large quantities, and such as would subsist men for a
long time; here was also wine and oil in abundance, with all kinds of
pulse and dates heaped up together; all which Eleazar found there, when
he and his Sicarii got possession of the fortress by treachery. These
fruits were also fresh and full ripe, and no way inferior to such fruits
newly laid in, although they were little short of a hundred years 14
from the laying in these provisions [by Herod], till the place was taken
by the Romans; nay, indeed, when the Romans got possession of those
fruits that were left, they found them not corrupted all that while; nor
should we be mistaken, if we supposed that the air was here the cause
of their enduring so long; this fortress being so high, and so free from
the mixture of all terrain and muddy particles of matter. There was also
found here a large quantity of all sorts of weapons of war, which had
been treasured up by that king, and were sufficient for ten thousand
men; there was cast iron, and brass, and tin, which show that he
had taken much pains to have all things here ready for the greatest
occasions; for the report goes how Herod thus prepared this fortress on
his own account, as a refuge against two kinds of danger; the one for
fear of the multitude of the Jews, lest they should depose him, and
restore their former kings to the government; the other danger was
greater and more terrible, which arose from Cleopatra queen of Egypt,
who did not conceal her intentions, but spoke often to Antony, and
desired him to cut off Herod, and entreated him to bestow the kingdom of
Judea upon her. And certainly it is a great wonder that Antony did never
comply with her commands in this point, as he was so miserably enslaved
to his passion for her; nor should any one have been surprised if she
had been gratified in such her request. So the fear of these dangers
made Herod rebuild Masada, and thereby leave it for the finishing stroke
of the Romans in this Jewish war.

5. Since therefore the Roman commander Silva had now built a wall on the
outside, round about this whole place, as we have said already, and
had thereby made a most accurate provision to prevent any one of the
besieged running away, he undertook the siege itself, though he found
but one single place that would admit of the banks he was to raise; for
behind that tower which secured the road that led to the palace, and to
the top of the hill from the west; there was a certain eminency of the
rock, very broad and very prominent, but three hundred cubits beneath
the highest part of Masada; it was called the White Promontory.
Accordingly, he got upon that part of the rock, and ordered the army
to bring earth; and when they fell to that work with alacrity, and
abundance of them together, the bank was raised, and became solid for
two hundred cubits in height. Yet was not this bank thought sufficiently
high for the use of the engines that were to be set upon it; but still
another elevated work of great stones compacted together was raised upon
that bank; this was fifty cubits, both in breadth and height. The other
machines that were now got ready were like to those that had been first
devised by Vespasian, and afterwards by Titus, for sieges. There was
also a tower made of the height of sixty cubits, and all over plated
with iron, out of which the Romans threw darts and stones from the
engines, and soon made those that fought from the walls of the place to
retire, and would not let them lift up their heads above the works. At
the same time Silva ordered that great battering ram which he had made
to be brought thither, and to be set against the wall, and to make
frequent batteries against it, which with some difficulty broke down
a part of the wall, and quite overthrew it. However, the Sicarii made
haste, and presently built another wall within that, which should not be
liable to the same misfortune from the machines with the other; it was
made soft and yielding, and so was capable of avoiding the terrible
blows that affected the other. It was framed after the following manner:
They laid together great beams of wood lengthways, one close to the end
of another, and the same way in which they were cut: there were two of
these rows parallel to one another, and laid at such a distance from
each other as the breadth of the wall required, and earth was put into
the space between those rows. Now, that the earth might not fall away
upon the elevation of this bank to a greater height, they further laid
other beams over cross them, and thereby bound those beams together that
lay lengthways. This work of theirs was like a real edifice; and when
the machines were applied, the blows were weakened by its yielding; and
as the materials by such concussion were shaken closer together, the
pile by that means became firmer than before. When Silva saw this, he
thought it best to endeavor the taking of this wall by setting fire to
it; so he gave order that the soldiers should throw a great number of
burning torches upon it: accordingly, as it was chiefly made of wood,
it soon took fire; and when it was once set on fire, its hollowness made
that fire spread to a mighty flame. Now, at the very beginning of this
fire, a north wind that then blew proved terrible to the Romans; for by
bringing the flame downward, it drove it upon them, and they were almost
in despair of success, as fearing their machines would be burnt: but
after this, on a sudden the wind changed into the south, as if it were
done by Divine Providence, and blew strongly the contrary way, and
carried the flame, and drove it against the wall, which was now on fire
through its entire thickness. So the Romans, having now assistance
from God, returned to their camp with joy, and resolved to attack their
enemies the very next day; on which occasion they set their watch more
carefully that night, lest any of the Jews should run away from them
without being discovered.

6. However, neither did Eleazar once think of flying away, nor would he
permit any one else to do so; but when he saw their wall burned down by
the fire, and could devise no other way of escaping, or room for their
further courage, and setting before their eyes what the Romans would do
to them, their children, and their wives, if they got them into their
power, he consulted about having them all slain. Now as he judged this
to be the best thing they could do in their present circumstances, he
gathered the most courageous of his companions together, and encouraged
them to take that course by a speech 15 which he made to them in the
manner following: "Since we, long ago, my generous friends, resolved
never to be servants to the Romans, nor to any other than to God
himself, who alone is the true and just Lord of mankind, the time is now
come that obliges us to make that resolution true in practice. And
let us not at this time bring a reproach upon ourselves for
self-contradiction, while we formerly would not undergo slavery, though
it were then without danger, but must now, together with slavery,
choose such punishments also as are intolerable; I mean this, upon the
supposition that the Romans once reduce us under their power while we
are alive. We were the very first that revolted from them, and we are
the last that fight against them; and I cannot but esteem it as a favor
that God hath granted us, that it is still in our power to die bravely,
and in a state of freedom, which hath not been the case of others, who
were conquered unexpectedly. It is very plain that we shall be taken
within a day's time; but it is still an eligible thing to die after a
glorious manner, together with our dearest friends. This is what our
enemies themselves cannot by any means hinder, although they be very
desirous to take us alive. Nor can we propose to ourselves any more
to fight them, and beat them. It had been proper indeed for us to have
conjectured at the purpose of God much sooner, and at the very first,
when we were so desirous of defending our liberty, and when we received
such sore treatment from one another, and worse treatment from our
enemies, and to have been sensible that the same God, who had of old
taken the Jewish nation into his favor, had now condemned them to
destruction; for had he either continued favorable, or been but in a
lesser degree displeased with us, he had not overlooked the destruction
of so many men, or delivered his most holy city to be burnt and
demolished by our enemies. To be sure we weakly hoped to have preserved
ourselves, and ourselves alone, still in a state of freedom, as if we
had been guilty of no sins ourselves against God, nor been partners with
those of others; we also taught other men to preserve their liberty.
Wherefore, consider how God hath convinced us that our hopes were in
vain, by bringing such distress upon us in the desperate state we are
now in, and which is beyond all our expectations; for the nature of this
fortress which was in itself unconquerable, hath not proved a means of
our deliverance; and even while we have still great abundance of food,
and a great quantity of arms, and other necessaries more than we want,
we are openly deprived by God himself of all hope of deliverance; for
that fire which was driven upon our enemies did not of its own accord
turn back upon the wall which we had built; this was the effect of God's
anger against us for our manifold sins, which we have been guilty of
in a most insolent and extravagant manner with regard to our own
countrymen; the punishments of which let us not receive from the Romans,
but from God himself, as executed by our own hands; for these will be
more moderate than the other. Let our wives die before they are abused,
and our children before they have tasted of slavery; and after we
have slain them, let us bestow that glorious benefit upon one another
mutually, and preserve ourselves in freedom, as an excellent funeral
monument for us. But first let us destroy our money and the fortress
by fire; for I am well assured that this will be a great grief to the
Romans, that they shall not be able to seize upon our bodies, and shall
fail of our wealth also; and let us spare nothing but our provisions;
for they will be a testimonial when we are dead that we were not subdued
for want of necessaries, but that, according to our original resolution,
we have preferred death before slavery."

7. This was Eleazar's speech to them. Yet did not the opinions of all
the auditors acquiesce therein; but although some of them were very
zealous to put his advice in practice, and were in a manner filled with
pleasure at it, and thought death to be a good thing, yet had those that
were most effeminate a commiseration for their wives and families;
and when these men were especially moved by the prospect of their own
certain death, they looked wistfully at one another, and by the tears
that were in their eyes declared their dissent from his opinion.
When Eleazar saw these people in such fear, and that their souls were
dejected at so prodigious a proposal, he was afraid lest perhaps these
effeminate persons should, by their lamentations and tears, enfeeble
those that heard what he had said courageously; so he did not leave
off exhorting them, but stirred up himself, and recollecting proper
arguments for raising their courage, he undertook to speak more briskly
and fully to them, and that concerning the immortality of the soul. So
he made a lamentable groan, and fixing his eyes intently on those that
wept, he spake thus: "Truly, I was greatly mistaken when I thought to be
assisting to brave men who struggled hard for their liberty, and to such
as were resolved either to live with honor, or else to die; but I find
that you are such people as are no better than others, either in virtue
or in courage, and are afraid of dying, though you be delivered thereby
from the greatest miseries, while you ought to make no delay in this
matter, nor to await any one to give you good advice; for the laws of
our country, and of God himself, have from ancient times, and as soon as
ever we could use our reason, continually taught us, and our forefathers
have corroborated the same doctrine by their actions, and by their
bravery of mind, that it is life that is a calamity to men, and not
death; for this last affords our souls their liberty, and sends them
by a removal into their own place of purity, where they are to be
insensible of all sorts of misery; for while souls are tied down to a
mortal body, they are partakers of its miseries; and really, to speak
the truth, they are themselves dead; for the union of what is divine
to what is mortal is disagreeable. It is true, the power of the soul
is great, even when it is imprisoned in a mortal body; for by moving it
after a way that is invisible, it makes the body a sensible instrument,
and causes it to advance further in its actions than mortal nature could
otherwise do. However, when it is freed from that weight which draws it
down to the earth and is connected with it, it obtains its own proper
place, and does then become a partaker of that blessed power, and those
abilities, which are then every way incapable of being hindered in their
operations. It continues invisible, indeed, to the eyes of men, as does
God himself; for certainly it is not itself seen while it is in the
body; for it is there after an invisible manner, and when it is freed
from it, it is still not seen. It is this soul which hath one nature,
and that an incorruptible one also; but yet it is the cause of the
change that is made in the body; for whatsoever it be which the soul
touches, that lives and flourishes; and from whatsoever it is removed,
that withers away and dies; such a degree is there in it of immortality.
Let me produce the state of sleep as a most evident demonstration of
the truth of what I say; wherein souls, when the body does not distract
them, have the sweetest rest depending on themselves, and conversing
with God, by their alliance to him; they then go every where, and
foretell many futurities beforehand. And why are we afraid of death,
while we are pleased with the rest that we have in sleep? And how absurd
a thing is it to pursue after liberty while we are alive, and yet to
envy it to ourselves where it will be eternal! We, therefore, who have
been brought up in a discipline of our own, ought to become an example
to others of our readiness to die. Yet, if we do stand in need of
foreigners to support us in this matter, let us regard those Indians
who profess the exercise of philosophy; for these good men do but
unwillingly undergo the time of life, and look upon it as a necessary
servitude, and make haste to let their souls loose from their bodies;
nay, when no misfortune presses them to it, nor drives them upon it,
these have such a desire of a life of immortality, that they tell other
men beforehand that they are about to depart; and nobody hinders them,
but every one thinks them happy men, and gives them letters to be
carried to their familiar friends [that are dead], so firmly and
certainly do they believe that souls converse with one another [in the
other world]. So when these men have heard all such commands that were
to be given them, they deliver their body to the fire; and, in order
to their getting their soul a separation from the body in the greatest
purity, they die in the midst of hymns of commendations made to them;
for their dearest friends conduct them to their death more readily than
do any of the rest of mankind conduct their fellow-citizens when they
are going a very long journey, who at the same time weep on their own
account, but look upon the others as happy persons, as so soon to be
made partakers of the immortal order of beings. Are not we, therefore,
ashamed to have lower notions than the Indians? and by our own cowardice
to lay a base reproach upon the laws of our country, which are so much
desired and imitated by all mankind? But put the case that we had
been brought up under another persuasion, and taught that life is the
greatest good which men are capable of, and that death is a calamity;
however, the circumstances we are now in ought to be an inducement to us
to bear such calamity courageously, since it is by the will of God, and
by necessity, that we are to die; for it now appears that God hath
made such a decree against the whole Jewish nation, that we are to be
deprived of this life which [he knew] we would not make a due use
of. For do not you ascribe the occasion of our present condition to
yourselves, nor think the Romans are the true occasion that this war we
have had with them is become so destructive to us all: these things
have not come to pass by their power, but a more powerful cause hath
intervened, and made us afford them an occasion of their appearing to be
conquerors over us. What Roman weapons, I pray you, were those by which
the Jews at Cesarea were slain? On the contrary, when they were no way
disposed to rebel, but were all the while keeping their seventh day
festival, and did not so much as lift up their hands against the
citizens of Cesarea, yet did those citizens run upon them in great
crowds, and cut their throats, and the throats of their wives and
children, and this without any regard to the Romans themselves, who
never took us for their enemies till we revolted from them. But some may
be ready to say, that truly the people of Cesarea had always a quarrel
against those that lived among them, and that when an opportunity
offered itself, they only satisfied the old rancor they had against
them. What then shall we say to those of Scythopolis, who ventured to
wage war with us on account of the Greeks? Nor did they do it by way of
revenge upon the Romans, when they acted in concert with our countrymen.
Wherefore you see how little our good-will and fidelity to them profited
us, while they were slain, they and their whole families, after the most
inhuman manner, which was all the requital that was made them for the
assistance they had afforded the others; for that very same destruction
which they had prevented from falling upon the others did they suffer
themselves from them, as if they had been ready to be the actors
against them. It would be too long for me to speak at this time of every
destruction brought upon us; for you cannot but know that there was not
any one Syrian city which did not slay their Jewish inhabitants, and
were not more bitter enemies to us than were the Romans themselves; nay,
even those of Damascus, 16 when they were able to allege no tolerable
pretense against us, filled their city with the most barbarous
slaughters of our people, and cut the throats of eighteen thousand Jews,
with their wives and children. And as to the multitude of those that
were slain in Egypt, and that with torments also, we have been informed
they were more than sixty thousand; those indeed being in a foreign
country, and so naturally meeting with nothing to oppose against their
enemies, were killed in the manner forementioned. As for all those of
us who have waged war against the Romans in our own country, had we not
sufficient reason to have sure hopes of victory? For we had arms, and
walls, and fortresses so prepared as not to be easily taken, and courage
not to be moved by any dangers in the cause of liberty, which encouraged
us all to revolt from the Romans. But then these advantages sufficed
us but for a short time, and only raised our hopes, while they really
appeared to be the origin of our miseries; for all we had hath been
taken from us, and all hath fallen under our enemies, as if these
advantages were only to render their victory over us the more glorious,
and were not disposed for the preservation of those by whom these
preparations were made. And as for those that are already dead in the
war, it is reasonable we should esteem them blessed, for they are
dead in defending, and not in betraying their liberty; but as to the
multitude of those that are now under the Romans, who would not pity
their condition? and who would not make haste to die, before he would
suffer the same miseries with them? Some of them have been put upon the
rack, and tortured with fire and whippings, and so died. Some have been
half devoured by wild beasts, and yet have been reserved alive to be
devoured by them a second time, in order to afford laughter and sport to
our enemies; and such of those as are alive still are to be looked on as
the most miserable, who, being so desirous of death, could not come
at it. And where is now that great city, the metropolis of the Jewish
nation, which was fortified by so many walls round about, which had
so many fortresses and large towers to defend it, which could hardly
contain the instruments prepared for the war, and which had so many ten
thousands of men to fight for it? Where is this city that was believed
to have God himself inhabiting therein? It is now demolished to the very
foundations, and hath nothing but that monument of it preserved, I mean
the camp of those that hath destroyed it, which still dwells upon its
ruins; some unfortunate old men also lie upon the ashes of the temple,
and a few women are there preserved alive by the enemy, for our bitter
shame and reproach. Now who is there that revolves these things in his
mind, and yet is able to bear the sight of the sun, though he might live
out of danger? Who is there so much his country's enemy, or so unmanly,
and so desirous of living, as not to repent that he is still alive? And
I cannot but wish that we had all died before we had seen that holy city
demolished by the hands of our enemies, or the foundations of our holy
temple dug up after so profane a manner. But since we had a generous
hope that deluded us, as if we might perhaps have been able to avenge
ourselves on our enemies on that account, though it be now become
vanity, and hath left us alone in this distress, let us make haste to
die bravely. Let us pity ourselves, our children, and our wives while it
is in our own power to show pity to them; for we were born to die, 17 as
well as those were whom we have begotten; nor is it in the power of the
most happy of our race to avoid it. But for abuses, and slavery, and
the sight of our wives led away after an ignominious manner, with their
children, these are not such evils as are natural and necessary among
men; although such as do not prefer death before those miseries, when it
is in their power so to do, must undergo even them, on account of their
own cowardice. We revolted from the Romans with great pretensions
to courage; and when, at the very last, they invited us to preserve
ourselves, we would not comply with them. Who will not, therefore,
believe that they will certainly be in a rage at us, in case they can
take us alive? Miserable will then be the young men who will be strong
enough in their bodies to sustain many torments! miserable also will
be those of elder years, who will not be able to bear those calamities
which young men might sustain! One man will be obliged to hear the voice
of his son implore help of his father, when his hands are bound. But
certainly our hands are still at liberty, and have a sword in them; let
them then be subservient to us in our glorious design; let us die before
we become slaves under our enemies, and let us go out of the world,
together with our children and our wives, in a state of freedom. This
it is that our laws command us to do; this it is that our wives
and children crave at our hands; nay, God himself hath brought this
necessity upon us; while the Romans desire the contrary, and are afraid
lest any of us should die before we are taken. Let us therefore make
haste, and instead of affording them so much pleasure, as they hope
for in getting us under their power, let us leave them an example
which shall at once cause their astonishment at our death, and their
admiration of our hardiness therein."






CHAPTER 9.


     How The People That Were In The Fortress Were Prevailed On
     By The Words Of Eleazar, Two Women And Five Children Only
     Excepted And All Submitted To Be Killed By One Another.

1. Now as Eleazar was proceeding on in this exhortation, they all
cut him off short, and made haste to do the work, as full of an
unconquerable ardor of mind, and moved with a demoniacal fury. So they
went their ways, as one still endeavoring to be before another, and as
thinking that this eagerness would be a demonstration of their courage
and good conduct, if they could avoid appearing in the last class; so
great was the zeal they were in to slay their wives and children, and
themselves also! Nor indeed, when they came to the work itself, did
their courage fail them, as one might imagine it would have done, but
they then held fast the same resolution, without wavering, which they
had upon the hearing of Eleazar's speech, while yet every one of them
still retained the natural passion of love to themselves and their
families, because the reasoning they went upon appeared to them to be
very just, even with regard to those that were dearest to them; for the
husbands tenderly embraced their wives, and took their children into
their arms, and gave the longest parting kisses to them, with tears
in their eyes. Yet at the same time did they complete what they had
resolved on, as if they had been executed by the hands of strangers; and
they had nothing else for their comfort but the necessity they were in
of doing this execution, to avoid that prospect they had of the miseries
they were to suffer from their enemies. Nor was there at length any
one of these men found that scrupled to act their part in this terrible
execution, but every one of them despatched his dearest relations.
Miserable men indeed were they! whose distress forced them to slay their
own wives and children with their own hands, as the lightest of those
evils that were before them. So they being not able to bear the grief
they were under for what they had done any longer, and esteeming it an
injury to those they had slain, to live even the shortest space of time
after them, they presently laid all they had upon a heap, and set fire
to it. They then chose ten men by lot out of them to slay all the rest;
every one of whom laid himself down by his wife and children on the
ground, and threw his arms about them, and they offered their necks to
the stroke of those who by lot executed that melancholy office; and when
these ten had, without fear, slain them all, they made the same rule for
casting lots for themselves, that he whose lot it was should first kill
the other nine, and after all should kill himself. Accordingly, all
these had courage sufficient to be no way behind one another in doing
or suffering; so, for a conclusion, the nine offered their necks to the
executioner, and he who was the last of all took a view of all the
other bodies, lest perchance some or other among so many that were slain
should want his assistance to be quite despatched, and when he perceived
that they were all slain, he set fire to the palace, and with the great
force of his hand ran his sword entirely through himself, and fell
down dead near to his own relations. So these people died with this
intention, that they would not leave so much as one soul among them all
alive to be subject to the Romans. Yet was there an ancient woman,
and another who was of kin to Eleazar, and superior to most women in
prudence and learning, with five children, who had concealed themselves
in caverns under ground, and had carried water thither for their drink,
and were hidden there when the rest were intent upon the slaughter of
one another. Those others were nine hundred and sixty in number, the
women and children being withal included in that computation. This
calamitous slaughter was made on the fifteenth day of the month
Xanthicus [Nisan].

2. Now for the Romans, they expected that they should be fought in the
morning, when, accordingly, they put on their armor, and laid bridges of
planks upon their ladders from their banks, to make an assault upon the
fortress, which they did; but saw nobody as an enemy, but a terrible
solitude on every side, with a fire within the place, as well as a
perfect silence. So they were at a loss to guess at what had happened.
At length they made a shout, as if it had been at a blow given by the
battering ram, to try whether they could bring any one out that was
within; the women heard this noise, and came out of their under-ground
cavern, and informed the Romans what had been done, as it was done; and
the second of them clearly described all both what was said and what
was done, and this manner of it; yet did they not easily give their
attention to such a desperate undertaking, and did not believe it could
be as they said; they also attempted to put the fire out, and quickly
cutting themselves a way through it, they came within the palace, and so
met with the multitude of the slain, but could take no pleasure in the
fact, though it were done to their enemies. Nor could they do other than
wonder at the courage of their resolution, and the immovable contempt of
death which so great a number of them had shown, when they went through
with such an action as that was.






CHAPTER 10.


     That Many Of The Sicarii Fled To Alexandria Also And What
     Dangers They Were In There; On Which Account That Temple
     Which Had Formerly Been Built By Onias The High Priest Was
     Destroyed.

1. When Masada was thus taken, the general left a garrison in the
fortress to keep it, and he himself went away to Cesarea; for there were
now no enemies left in the country, but it was all overthrown by so long
a war. Yet did this war afford disturbances and dangerous disorders even
in places very far remote from Judea; for still it came to pass that
many Jews were slain at Alexandria in Egypt; for as many of the Sicarii
as were able to fly thither, out of the seditious wars in Judea, were
not content to have saved themselves, but must needs be undertaking to
make new disturbances, and persuaded many of those that entertained
them to assert their liberty, to esteem the Romans to be no better than
themselves, and to look upon God as their only Lord and Master. But when
part of the Jews of reputation opposed them, they slew some of them, and
with the others they were very pressing in their exhortations to revolt
from the Romans; but when the principal men of the senate saw what
madness they were come to, they thought it no longer safe for themselves
to overlook them. So they got all the Jews together to an assembly, and
accused the madness of the Sicarii, and demonstrated that they had been
the authors of all the evils that had come upon them. They said also
that "these men, now they were run away from Judea, having no sure hope
of escaping, because as soon as ever they shall be known, they will be
soon destroyed by the Romans, they come hither and fill us full of those
calamities which belong to them, while we have not been partakers with
them in any of their sins." Accordingly, they exhorted the multitude to
have a care, lest they should be brought to destruction by their means,
and to make their apology to the Romans for what had been done,
by delivering these men up to them; who being thus apprized of the
greatness of the danger they were in, complied with what was proposed,
and ran with great violence upon the Sicarii, and seized upon them; and
indeed six hundred of them were caught immediately: but as to all those
that fled into Egypt 18 and to the Egyptian Thebes, it was not long ere
they were caught also, and brought back, whose courage, or whether we
ought to call it madness, or hardiness in their opinions, every body was
amazed at. For when all sorts of torments and vexations of their bodies
that could be devised were made use of to them, they could not get any
one of them to comply so far as to confess, or seem to confess, that
Caesar was their lord; but they preserved their own opinion, in spite
of all the distress they were brought to, as if they received these
torments and the fire itself with bodies insensible of pain, and with
a soul that in a manner rejoiced under them. But what was most of all
astonishing to the beholders was the courage of the children; for not
one of these children was so far overcome by these torments, as to name
Caesar for their lord. So far does the strength of the courage [of the
soul] prevail over the weakness of the body.

2. Now Lupus did then govern Alexandria, who presently sent Caesar word
of this commotion; who having in suspicion the restless temper of the
Jews for innovation, and being afraid lest they should get together
again, and persuade some others to join with them, gave orders to Lupus
to demolish that Jewish temple which was in the region called Onion,
19 and was in Egypt, which was built and had its denomination from the
occasion following: Onias, the son of Simon, one of the Jewish high
priests fled from Antiochus the king of Syria, when he made war with the
Jews, and came to Alexandria; and as Ptolemy received him very kindly,
on account of hatred to Antiochus, he assured him, that if he would
comply with his proposal, he would bring all the Jews to his assistance;
and when the king agreed to do it so far as he was able, he desired him
to give him leave to build a temple some where in Egypt, and to worship
God according to the customs of his own country; for that the Jews would
then be so much readier to fight against Antiochus who had laid waste
the temple at Jerusalem, and that they would then come to him with
greater good-will; and that, by granting them liberty of conscience,
very many of them would come over to him.

3. So Ptolemy complied with his proposals, and gave him a place one
hundred and eighty furlongs distant from Memphis. 20 That Nomos was
called the Nomos of Hellopolis, where Onias built a fortress and a
temple, not like to that at Jerusalem, but such as resembled a tower.
He built it of large stones to the height of sixty cubits; he made the
structure of the altar in imitation of that in our own country, and in
like manner adorned with gifts, excepting the make of the candlestick,
for he did not make a candlestick, but had a [single] lamp hammered out
of a piece of gold, which illuminated the place with its rays, and which
he hung by a chain of gold; but the entire temple was encompassed with
a wall of burnt brick, though it had gates of stone. The king also gave
him a large country for a revenue in money, that both the priests might
have a plentiful provision made for them, and that God might have great
abundance of what things were necessary for his worship. Yet did not
Onias do this out of a sober disposition, but he had a mind to contend
with the Jews at Jerusalem, and could not forget the indignation he had
for being banished thence. Accordingly, he thought that by building this
temple he should draw away a great number from them to himself. There
had been also a certain ancient prediction made by [a prophet] whose
name was Isaiah, about six hundred years before, that this temple should
be built by a man that was a Jew in Egypt. And this is the history of
the building of that temple.

4. And now Lupus, the governor of Alexandria, upon the receipt of
Caesar's letter, came to the temple, and carried out of it some of the
donations dedicated thereto, and shut up the temple itself. And as Lupus
died a little afterward, Paulinus succeeded him. This man left none of
those donations there, and threatened the priests severely if they
did not bring them all out; nor did he permit any who were desirous of
worshipping God there so much as to come near the whole sacred place;
but when he had shut up the gates, he made it entirely inaccessible,
insomuch that there remained no longer the least footsteps of any Divine
worship that had been in that place. Now the duration of the time from
the building of this temple till it was shut up again was three hundred
and forty-three years.






CHAPTER 11.


     Concerning Jonathan, One Of The Sicarii, That Stirred Up A
     Sedition In Cyrene, And Was A False Accuser [Of The
     Innocent].

1. And now did the madness of the Sicarii, like a disease, reach as far
as the cities of Cyrene; for one Jonathan, a vile person, and by trade
a weaver, came thither and prevailed with no small number of the
poorer sort to give ear to him; he also led them into the desert, upon
promising them that he would show them signs and apparitions. And as for
the other Jews of Cyrene, he concealed his knavery from them, and put
tricks upon them; but those of the greatest dignity among them informed
Catullus, the governor of the Libyan Pentapolis, of his march into the
desert, and of the preparations he had made for it. So he sent out after
him both horsemen and footmen, and easily overcame them, because they
were unarmed men; of these many were slain in the fight, but some were
taken alive, and brought to Catullus. As for Jonathan, the head of this
plot, he fled away at that time; but upon a great and very diligent
search, which was made all the country over for him, he was at last
taken. And when he was brought to Catullus, he devised a way whereby he
both escaped punishment himself, and afforded an occasion to Catullus
of doing much mischief; for he falsely accused the richest men among the
Jews, and said that they had put him upon what he did.

2. Now Catullus easily admitted of these his calumnies, and aggravated
matters greatly, and made tragical exclamations, that he might also be
supposed to have had a hand in the finishing of the Jewish war. But what
was still harder, he did not only give a too easy belief to his stories,
but he taught the Sicarii to accuse men falsely. He bid this Jonathan,
therefore, to name one Alexander, a Jew [with whom he had formerly had
a quarrel, and openly professed that he hated him]; he also got him to
name his wife Bernice, as concerned with him. These two Catullus ordered
to be slain in the first place; nay, after them he caused all the rich
and wealthy Jews to be slain, being no fewer in all than three thousand.
This he thought he might do safely, because he confiscated their
effects, and added them to Caesar's revenues.

3. Nay, indeed, lest any Jews that lived elsewhere should convict him of
his villainy, he extended his false accusations further, and persuaded
Jonathan, and certain others that were caught with him, to bring an
accusation of attempts for innovation against the Jews that were of the
best character both at Alexandria and at Rome. One of these, against
whom this treacherous accusation was laid, was Josephus, the writer of
these books. However, this plot, thus contrived by Catullus, did not
succeed according to his hopes; for though he came himself to Rome, and
brought Jonathan and his companions along with him in bonds, and thought
he should have had no further inquisition made as to those lies that
were forged under his government, or by his means; yet did Vespasian
suspect the matter and made an inquiry how far it was true. And when he
understood that the accusation laid against the Jews was an unjust one,
he cleared them of the crimes charged upon them, and this on account of
Titus's concern about the matter, and brought a deserved punishment upon
Jonathan; for he was first tormented, and then burnt alive.

4. But as to Catullus, the emperors were so gentle to him, that he
underwent no severe condemnation at this time; yet was it not long
before he fell into a complicated and almost incurable distemper, and
died miserably. He was not only afflicted in body, but the distemper
in his mind was more heavy upon him than the other; for he was terribly
disturbed, and continually cried out that he saw the ghosts of those
whom he had slain standing before him. Where upon he was not able to
contain himself, but leaped out of his bed, as if both torments and fire
were brought to him. This his distemper grew still a great deal worse
and worse continually, and his very entrails were so corroded, that they
fell out of his body, and in that condition he died. Thus he became as
great an instance of Divine Providence as ever was, and demonstrated
that God punishes wicked men.

5. And here we shall put an end to this our history; wherein we formerly
promised to deliver the same with all accuracy, to such as should be
desirous of understanding after what manner this war of the Romans with
the Jews was managed. Of which history, how good the style is, must be
left to the determination of the readers; but as for its agreement with
the facts, I shall not scruple to say, and that boldly, that truth hath
been what I have alone aimed at through its entire composition.

WAR BOOK 7 FOOTNOTES 2 (return) [ This Tereutius Rufus, as Reland in
part observes here, is the same person whom the Talmudists call Turnus
Rufus; of whom they relate, that "he ploughed up Sion as a field, and
made Jerusalem become as heaps, and the mountain of the house as the
high Idaces of a forest;" which was long before foretold by the prophet
Micah, ch. 3:12, and quoted from him in the prophecies of Jeremiah, ch.
26:18.]


3 (return) [ See Ecclesiastes 8:11.]


4 (return) [ This Berytus was certainly a Roman colony, and has coins
extant that witness the same, as Hudson and Spanheim inform us. See the
note on Antiq. B. XVI: ch. 11. sect. 1.]


5 (return) [ The Jews at Antioch and Alexandria, the two principal
cities in all the East, had allowed them, both by the Macedonians, and
afterwards by the Romans, a governor of their own, who was exempt from
the jurisdiction of the other civil governors. He was called sometimes
barely "governor," sometimes "ethnarch," and [at Alexandria] "alabarch,"
as Dr. Hudson takes notice on this place out of Fuller's Miscellanies.
They had the like governor or governors allowed them at Babylon under
their captivity there, as the history of Susanna implies.]


6 (return) [ This Classicus, and Civilis, and Cerealis are names well
known in Tacitus; the two former as moving sedition against the Romans,
and the last as sent to repress them by Vespasian, just as they are here
described in Josephus; which is the case also of Fontellis Agrippa
and Rubrius Gallup, i, sect. 3. But as to the very favorable account
presently given of Domitian, particularly as to his designs in this his
Gallic and German expedition, it is not a little contrary to that in
Suetonius, Vesp. sect. 7. Nor are the reasons unobvious that might
occasion this great diversity: Domitian was one of Josephus's patrons,
and when he published these books of the Jewish war, was very young, and
had hardly begun those wicked practices which rendered him so infamous
afterward; while Suetonius seems to have been too young, and too low
in life, to receive any remarkable favors from him; as Domitian was
certainly very lewd and cruel, and generally hated, when Suetonius wrote
about him.]


7 (return) [ Since in these latter ages this Sabbatic River, once so
famous, which, by Josephus's account here, ran every seventh day,
and rested on six, but according to Pliny, Nat. Hist. 31. II, ran
perpetually on six days, and rested every seventh, [though it no way
appears by either of their accounts that the seventh day of this river
was the Jewish seventh day or sabbath,] is quite vanished, I shall add
no more about it: only see Dr. Hudson's note. In Varenius's Geography,
i, 17, the reader will find several instances of such periodical
fountains and rivers, though none of their periods were that of a just
week as of old this appears to have been.]


8 (return) [ Vespasian and his two sons, Titus and Domitian.]


9 (return) [ See the representations of these Jewish vessels as they
still stand on Titus's triumphal arch at Rome, in Reland's very curious
book de Spoliis Ternpli, throughout. But what, things are chiefly to be
noted are these: [1.] That Josephus says the candlestick here carried in
this triumph was not thoroughly like that which was used in the temple,
which appears in the number of the little knobs and flowers in that on
the triumphal arch not well agreeing with Moses's description, Exodus
25:31-36. [2.] The smallness of the branches in Josephus compared with
the thickness of those on that arch. [3.] That the Law or Pentateuch
does not appear on that arch at all, though Josephus, an eye-witness,
assures us that it was carried in this procession. All which things
deserve the consideration of the inquisitive reader.]


10 (return) [ Spanheim observes here, that in Graceia Major and
Sicily they had rue prodigiously great and durable, like this rue at
Machaerus.]


11 (return) [ This strange account of the place and root Baaras seems to
have been taken from the magicians, and the root to have been made use
of in the days of Josephus, in that superstitious way of casting out
demons, supposed by him to have been derived from king Solomon; of which
we have already seen he had a great opinion, Antiq. B. VIII. ch. 2.
sect. 5. We also may hence learn the true notion Josephus had of demons
and demoniacs, exactly like that of the Jews and Christians in the New
Testament, and the first four centuries. See Antiq. B. I. ch. 8. sect.
2; B. XI, ch. 2. sect. 3.]


12 (return) [ It is very remarkable that Titus did not people this now
desolate country of Judea, but ordered it to be all sold; nor indeed is
it properly peopled at this day, but lies ready for its old inhabitants
the Jews, at their future restoration. See Literal Accomplishment of
Prophecies, p. 77.]


13 (return) [ That the city Emmaus, or Areindus, in Josephus and others
which was the place of the government of Julius Africanus were slain,
to the number of one thousand seven hundred, as were the women and the
children made slaves. But as Bassus thought he must perform the covenant
he had made with those that had surrendered the citadel, he let them go,
and restored Eleazar to them, in the beginning of the third century, and
which he then procured to be rebuilt, and after which rebuilding it
was called Nicopolis, is entirely different from that Emmaus which is
mentioned by St. Luke 24;13; see Reland's Paleestina, lib. II. p. 429,
and under the name Ammaus also. But he justly thinks that that in St.
Luke may well be the same with his Ammaus before us, especially since
the Greek copies here usually make it sixty furlongs distant from
Jerusalem, as does St. Luke, though the Latin copies say only thirty.
The place also allotted for these eight hundred soldiers, as for a Roman
garrison, in this place, would most naturally be not so remote from
Jerusalem as was the other Emmaus, or Nicopolis.]


14 (return) [ Pliny and others confirm this strange paradox, that
provisions laid up against sieges will continue good for a hundred
years, as Spanheim notes upon this place.]


15 (return) [ The speeches in this and the next section, as introduced
under the person of this Eleazar, are exceeding remarkable, and of the
noblest subjects, the contempt of death, and the dignity and immortality
of the soul; and that not only among the Jews, but among the Indians
themselves also; and are highly worthy the perusal of all the curious.
It seems as if that philosophic lady who survived, ch. 9. sect. 1, 2,
remembered the substance of these discourses, as spoken by Eleazar, and
so Josephus clothed them in his own words: at the lowest they contain
the Jewish notions on these heads, as understood then by our Josephus,
and cannot but deserve a suitable regard from us.]


16 (return) [ See B. II. ch. 20. sect. 2, where the number of the slain
is but 10,000.]


17 (return) [ Reland here sets down a parallel aphorism of one of
the Jewish Rabbins, "We are born that we may die, and die that we may
live."]


18 (return) [ Since Josephus here informs us that some of these Sicarii,
or ruffians, went from Alexandria [which was itself in Egypt, in a large
sense] into Egypt, and Thebes there situated, Reland well observes, from
Vossius, that Egypt sometimes denotes Proper or Upper Egypt, as distinct
from the Delta, and the lower parts near Palestine. Accordingly, as he
adds, those that say it never rains in Egypt must mean the Proper or
Upper Egypt, because it does sometimes rain in the other parts. See the
note on Antiq. B. II. ch. 7. sect. 7, and B. III. ch. 1. sect. 6.]


19 (return) [ Of this temple of Onias's building in Egypt, see the notes
on Antiq. B. XIII. ch. 3. sect. 1. But whereas it is elsewhere, both
of the War, B. I. ch. 1. sect. 1, and in the Antiquities as now quoted,
said that this temple was like to that at Jerusalem, and here that it
was not like it, but like a tower, sect. 3, there is some reason to
suspect the reading here, and that either the negative particle is here
to be blotted out, or the word entirely added.]


20 (return) [ We must observe, that Josephus here speaks of Antiochus
who profaned the temple as now alive, when Onias had leave given them
by Philometer to build his temple; whereas it seems not to have been
actually built till about fifteen years afterwards. Yet, because it is
said in the Antiquities that Onias went to Philometer, B. XII. ch.
9. sect. 7, during the lifetime of that Antiochus, it is probable he
petitioned, and perhaps obtained his leave then, though it were not
actually built or finished till fifteen years afterward.]








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WARS OF THE JEWS; OR, THE HISTORY OF THE DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.




﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Adventure of the Dying Detective
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Adventure of the Dying Detective

Author: Arthur Conan Doyle

Release date: October 1, 2000 [eBook #2347]
                Most recently updated: December 31, 2020

Language: English

Credits: Produced by David Brannan.  HTML version by Al Haines.


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURE OF THE DYING DETECTIVE ***




Produced by David Brannan.  HTML version by Al Haines.









The Adventure of the Dying Detective


By

Sir Arthur Conan Doyle




Mrs. Hudson, the landlady of Sherlock Holmes, was a long-suffering
woman.  Not only was her first-floor flat invaded at all hours by
throngs of singular and often undesirable characters but her remarkable
lodger showed an eccentricity and irregularity in his life which must
have sorely tried her patience. His incredible untidiness, his
addiction to music at strange hours, his occasional revolver practice
within doors, his weird and often malodorous scientific experiments,
and the atmosphere of violence and danger which hung around him made
him the very worst tenant in London.  On the other hand, his payments
were princely. I have no doubt that the house might have been purchased
at the price which Holmes paid for his rooms during the years that I
was with him.

The landlady stood in the deepest awe of him and never dared to
interfere with him, however outrageous his proceedings might seem.  She
was fond of him, too, for he had a remarkable gentleness and courtesy
in his dealings with women.  He disliked and distrusted the sex, but he
was always a chivalrous opponent. Knowing how genuine was her regard
for him, I listened earnestly to her story when she came to my rooms in
the second year of my married life and told me of the sad condition to
which my poor friend was reduced.

"He's dying, Dr. Watson," said she.  "For three days he has been
sinking, and I doubt if he will last the day.  He would not let me get
a doctor.  This morning when I saw his bones sticking out of his face
and his great bright eyes looking at me I could stand no more of it.
'With your leave or without it, Mr. Holmes, I am going for a doctor
this very hour,' said I.  'Let it be Watson, then,' said he.  I
wouldn't waste an hour in coming to him, sir, or you may not see him
alive."

I was horrified for I had heard nothing of his illness.  I need not say
that I rushed for my coat and my hat.  As we drove back I asked for the
details.

"There is little I can tell you, sir.  He has been working at a case
down at Rotherhithe, in an alley near the river, and he has brought
this illness back with him.  He took to his bed on Wednesday afternoon
and has never moved since.  For these three days neither food nor drink
has passed his lips."

"Good God!  Why did you not call in a doctor?"

"He wouldn't have it, sir.  You know how masterful he is.  I didn't
dare to disobey him.  But he's not long for this world, as you'll see
for yourself the moment that you set eyes on him."

He was indeed a deplorable spectacle.  In the dim light of a foggy
November day the sick room was a gloomy spot, but it was that gaunt,
wasted face staring at me from the bed which sent a chill to my heart.
His eyes had the brightness of fever, there was a hectic flush upon
either cheek, and dark crusts clung to his lips; the thin hands upon
the coverlet twitched incessantly, his voice was croaking and
spasmodic.  He lay listlessly as I entered the room, but the sight of
me brought a gleam of recognition to his eyes.

"Well, Watson, we seem to have fallen upon evil days," said he in a
feeble voice, but with something of his old carelessness of manner.

"My dear fellow!" I cried, approaching him.

"Stand back!  Stand right back!" said he with the sharp imperiousness
which I had associated only with moments of crisis. "If you approach
me, Watson, I shall order you out of the house."

"But why?"

"Because it is my desire.  Is that not enough?"

Yes, Mrs. Hudson was right.  He was more masterful than ever.  It was
pitiful, however, to see his exhaustion.

"I only wished to help," I explained.

"Exactly!  You will help best by doing what you are told."

"Certainly, Holmes."

He relaxed the austerity of his manner.

"You are not angry?" he asked, gasping for breath.

Poor devil, how could I be angry when I saw him lying in such a plight
before me?

"It's for your own sake, Watson," he croaked.

"For MY sake?"

"I know what is the matter with me.  It is a coolie disease from
Sumatra--a thing that the Dutch know more about than we, though they
have made little of it up to date.  One thing only is certain.  It is
infallibly deadly, and it is horribly contagious."

He spoke now with a feverish energy, the long hands twitching and
jerking as he motioned me away.

"Contagious by touch, Watson--that's it, by touch.  Keep your distance
and all is well."

"Good heavens, Holmes!  Do you suppose that such a consideration weighs
with me of an instant?  It would not affect me in the case of a
stranger.  Do you imagine it would prevent me from doing my duty to so
old a friend?"

Again I advanced, but he repulsed me with a look of furious anger.

"If you will stand there I will talk.  If you do not you must leave the
room."

I have so deep a respect for the extraordinary qualities of Holmes that
I have always deferred to his wishes, even when I least understood
them.  But now all my professional instincts were aroused.  Let him be
my master elsewhere, I at least was his in a sick room.

"Holmes," said I, "you are not yourself.  A sick man is but a child,
and so I will treat you.  Whether you like it or not, I will examine
your symptoms and treat you for them."

He looked at me with venomous eyes.

"If I am to have a doctor whether I will or not, let me at least have
someone in whom I have confidence," said he.

"Then you have none in me?"

"In your friendship, certainly.  But facts are facts, Watson, and,
after all, you are only a general practitioner with very limited
experience and mediocre qualifications.  It is painful to have to say
these things, but you leave me no choice."

I was bitterly hurt.

"Such a remark is unworthy of you, Holmes.  It shows me very clearly
the state of your own nerves.  But if you have no confidence in me I
would not intrude my services.  Let me bring Sir Jasper Meek or Penrose
Fisher, or any of the best men in London.  But someone you MUST have,
and that is final.  If you think that I am going to stand here and see
you die without either helping you myself or bringing anyone else to
help you, then you have mistaken your man."

"You mean well, Watson," said the sick man with something between a sob
and a groan.  "Shall I demonstrate your own ignorance? What do you
know, pray, of Tapanuli fever?  What do you know of the black Formosa
corruption?"

"I have never heard of either."

"There are many problems of disease, many strange pathological
possibilities, in the East, Watson."  He paused after each sentence to
collect his failing strength.  "I have learned so much during some
recent researches which have a medico-criminal aspect.  It was in the
course of them that I contracted this complaint.  You can do nothing."

"Possibly not.  But I happen to know that Dr. Ainstree, the greatest
living authority upon tropical disease, is now in London.  All
remonstrance is useless, Holmes, I am going this instant to fetch him."
I turned resolutely to the door.

Never have I had such a shock!  In an instant, with a tiger-spring, the
dying man had intercepted me.  I heard the sharp snap of a twisted key.
The next moment he had staggered back to his bed, exhausted and panting
after his one tremendous outflame of energy.

"You won't take the key from me by force, Watson, I've got you, my
friend.  Here you are, and here you will stay until I will otherwise.
But I'll humour you."  (All this in little gasps, with terrible
struggles for breath between.)  "You've only my own good at heart.  Of
course I know that very well.  You shall have your way, but give me
time to get my strength.  Not now, Watson, not now.  It's four o'clock.
At six you can go."

"This is insanity, Holmes."

"Only two hours, Watson.  I promise you will go at six.  Are you
content to wait?"

"I seem to have no choice."

"None in the world, Watson.  Thank you, I need no help in arranging the
clothes.  You will please keep your distance.  Now, Watson, there is
one other condition that I would make.  You will seek help, not from
the man you mention, but from the one that I choose."

"By all means."

"The first three sensible words that you have uttered since you entered
this room, Watson.  You will find some books over there. I am somewhat
exhausted; I wonder how a battery feels when it pours electricity into
a non-conductor?  At six, Watson, we resume our conversation."

But it was destined to be resumed long before that hour, and in
circumstances which gave me a shock hardly second to that caused by his
spring to the door.  I had stood for some minutes looking at the silent
figure in the bed.  His face was almost covered by the clothes and he
appeared to be asleep.  Then, unable to settle down to reading, I
walked slowly round the room, examining the pictures of celebrated
criminals with which every wall was adorned.  Finally, in my aimless
perambulation, I came to the mantelpiece.  A litter of pipes,
tobacco-pouches, syringes, penknives, revolver-cartridges, and other
debris was scattered over it.  In the midst of these was a small black
and white ivory box with a sliding lid.  It was a neat little thing,
and I had stretched out my hand to examine it more closely, when----

It was a dreadful cry that he gave--a yell which might have been heard
down the street.  My skin went cold and my hair bristled at that
horrible scream.  As I turned I caught a glimpse of a convulsed face
and frantic eyes.  I stood paralyzed, with the little box in my hand.

"Put it down!  Down, this instant, Watson--this instant, I say!" His
head sank back upon the pillow and he gave a deep sigh of relief as I
replaced the box upon the mantelpiece.  "I hate to have my things
touched, Watson.  You know that I hate it.  You fidget me beyond
endurance. You, a doctor--you are enough to drive a patient into an
asylum.  Sit down, man, and let me have my rest!"

The incident left a most unpleasant impression upon my mind.  The
violent and causeless excitement, followed by this brutality of speech,
so far removed from his usual suavity, showed me how deep was the
disorganization of his mind.  Of all ruins, that of a noble mind is the
most deplorable.  I sat in silent dejection until the stipulated time
had passed.  He seemed to have been watching the clock as well as I,
for it was hardly six before he began to talk with the same feverish
animation as before.

"Now, Watson," said he.  "Have you any change in your pocket?"

"Yes."

"Any silver?"

"A good deal."

"How many half-crowns?"

"I have five."

"Ah, too few!  Too few!  How very unfortunate, Watson!  However, such
as they are you can put them in your watchpocket.  And all the rest of
your money in your left trouser pocket.  Thank you. It will balance you
so much better like that."

This was raving insanity.  He shuddered, and again made a sound between
a cough and a sob.

"You will now light the gas, Watson, but you will be very careful that
not for one instant shall it be more than half on.  I implore you to be
careful, Watson.  Thank you, that is excellent. No, you need not draw
the blind.  Now you will have the kindness to place some letters and
papers upon this table within my reach. Thank you.  Now some of that
litter from the mantelpiece. Excellent, Watson!  There is a sugar-tongs
there.  Kindly raise that small ivory box with its assistance.  Place
it here among the papers.  Good!  You can now go and fetch Mr.
Culverton Smith, of 13 Lower Burke Street."

To tell the truth, my desire to fetch a doctor had somewhat weakened,
for poor Holmes was so obviously delirious that it seemed dangerous to
leave him.  However, he was as eager now to consult the person named as
he had been obstinate in refusing.

"I never heard the name," said I.

"Possibly not, my good Watson.  It may surprise you to know that the
man upon earth who is best versed in this disease is not a medical man,
but a planter.  Mr. Culverton Smith is a well-known resident of
Sumatra, now visiting London.  An outbreak of the disease upon his
plantation, which was distant from medical aid, caused him to study it
himself, with some rather far-reaching consequences.  He is a very
methodical person, and I did not desire you to start before six,
because I was well aware that you would not find him in his study.  If
you could persuade him to come here and give us the benefit of his
unique experience of this disease, the investigation of which has been
his dearest hobby, I cannot doubt that he could help me."

I gave Holmes's remarks as a consecutive whole and will not attempt to
indicate how they were interrupted by gaspings for breath and those
clutchings of his hands which indicated the pain from which he was
suffering.  His appearance had changed for the worse during the few
hours that I had been with him.  Those hectic spots were more
pronounced, the eyes shone more brightly out of darker hollows, and a
cold sweat glimmered upon his brow. He still retained, however, the
jaunty gallantry of his speech. To the last gasp he would always be the
master.

"You will tell him exactly how you have left me," said he.  "You will
convey the very impression which is in your own mind--a dying man--a
dying and delirious man.  Indeed, I cannot think why the whole bed of
the ocean is not one solid mass of oysters, so prolific the creatures
seem.  Ah, I am wandering!  Strange how the brain controls the brain!
What was I saying, Watson?"

"My directions for Mr. Culverton Smith."

"Ah, yes, I remember.  My life depends upon it.  Plead with him,
Watson.  There is no good feeling between us.  His nephew, Watson--I
had suspicions of foul play and I allowed him to see it.  The boy died
horribly.  He has a grudge against me.  You will soften him, Watson.
Beg him, pray him, get him here by any means.  He can save me--only he!"

"I will bring him in a cab, if I have to carry him down to it."

"You will do nothing of the sort.  You will persuade him to come. And
then you will return in front of him.  Make any excuse so as not to
come with him.  Don't forget, Watson.  You won't fail me. You never did
fail me.  No doubt there are natural enemies which limit the increase
of the creatures.  You and I, Watson, we have done our part.  Shall the
world, then, be overrun by oysters? No, no; horrible!  You'll convey
all that is in your mind."

I left him full of the image of this magnificent intellect babbling
like a foolish child.  He had handed me the key, and with a happy
thought I took it with me lest he should lock himself in.  Mrs. Hudson
was waiting, trembling and weeping, in the passage.  Behind me as I
passed from the flat I heard Holmes's high, thin voice in some
delirious chant.  Below, as I stood whistling for a cab, a man came on
me through the fog.

"How is Mr. Holmes, sir?" he asked.

It was an old acquaintance, Inspector Morton, of Scotland Yard, dressed
in unofficial tweeds.

"He is very ill," I answered.

He looked at me in a most singular fashion.  Had it not been too
fiendish, I could have imagined that the gleam of the fanlight showed
exultation in his face.

"I heard some rumour of it," said he.

The cab had driven up, and I left him.

Lower Burke Street proved to be a line of fine houses lying in the
vague borderland between Notting Hill and Kensington.  The particular
one at which my cabman pulled up had an air of smug and demure
respectability in its old-fashioned iron railings, its massive
folding-door, and its shining brasswork.  All was in keeping with a
solemn butler who appeared framed in the pink radiance of a tinted
electrical light behind him.

"Yes, Mr. Culverton Smith is in.  Dr. Watson!  Very good, sir, I will
take up your card."

My humble name and title did not appear to impress Mr. Culverton Smith.
Through the half-open door I heard a high, petulant, penetrating voice.

"Who is this person?  What does he want?  Dear me, Staples, how often
have I said that I am not to be disturbed in my hours of study?"

There came a gentle flow of soothing explanation from the butler.

"Well, I won't see him, Staples.  I can't have my work interrupted like
this.  I am not at home.  Say so.  Tell him to come in the morning if
he really must see me."

Again the gentle murmur.

"Well, well, give him that message.  He can come in the morning, or he
can stay away.  My work must not be hindered."

I thought of Holmes tossing upon his bed of sickness and counting the
minutes, perhaps, until I could bring help to him.  It was not a time
to stand upon ceremony.  His life depended upon my promptness.  Before
the apologetic butler had delivered his message I had pushed past him
and was in the room.

With a shrill cry of anger a man rose from a reclining chair beside the
fire.  I saw a great yellow face, coarse-grained and greasy, with
heavy, double-chin, and two sullen, menacing gray eyes which glared at
me from under tufted and sandy brows.  A high bald head had a small
velvet smoking-cap poised coquettishly upon one side of its pink curve.
The skull was of enormous capacity, and yet as I looked down I saw to
my amazement that the figure of the man was small and frail, twisted in
the shoulders and back like one who has suffered from rickets in his
childhood.

"What's this?" he cried in a high, screaming voice.  "What is the
meaning of this intrusion?  Didn't I send you word that I would see you
to-morrow morning?"

"I am sorry," said I, "but the matter cannot be delayed.  Mr. Sherlock
Holmes--"

The mention of my friend's name had an extraordinary effect upon the
little man.  The look of anger passed in an instant from his face.  His
features became tense and alert.

"Have you come from Holmes?" he asked.

"I have just left him."

"What about Holmes?  How is he?"

"He is desperately ill.  That is why I have come."

The man motioned me to a chair, and turned to resume his own.  As he
did so I caught a glimpse of his face in the mirror over the
mantelpiece.  I could have sworn that it was set in a malicious and
abominable smile.  Yet I persuaded myself that it must have been some
nervous contraction which I had surprised, for he turned to me an
instant later with genuine concern upon his features.

"I am sorry to hear this," said he.  "I only know Mr. Holmes through
some business dealings which we have had, but I have every respect for
his talents and his character.  He is an amateur of crime, as I am of
disease.  For him the villain, for me the microbe. There are my
prisons," he continued, pointing to a row of bottles and jars which
stood upon a side table. "Among those gelatine cultivations some of the
very worst offenders in the world are now doing time."

"It was on account of your special knowledge that Mr. Holmes desired to
see you.  He has a high opinion of you and thought that you were the
one man in London who could help him."

The little man started, and the jaunty smoking-cap slid to the floor.

"Why?" he asked.  "Why should Mr. Homes think that I could help him in
his trouble?"

"Because of your knowledge of Eastern diseases."

"But why should he think that this disease which he has contracted is
Eastern?"

"Because, in some professional inquiry, he has been working among
Chinese sailors down in the docks."

Mr. Culverton Smith smiled pleasantly and picked up his smoking-cap.

"Oh, that's it--is it?" said he.  "I trust the matter is not so grave
as you suppose.  How long has he been ill?"

"About three days."

"Is he delirious?"

"Occasionally."

"Tut, tut!  This sounds serious.  It would be inhuman not to answer his
call.  I very much resent any interruption to my work, Dr. Watson, but
this case is certainly exceptional.  I will come with you at once."

I remembered Holmes's injunction.

"I have another appointment," said I.

"Very good.  I will go alone.  I have a note of Mr. Holmes's address.
You can rely upon my being there within half an hour at most."

It was with a sinking heart that I reentered Holmes's bedroom. For all
that I knew the worst might have happened in my absence. To my enormous
relief,  he had improved greatly in the interval. His appearance was as
ghastly as ever, but all trace of delirium had left him and he spoke in
a feeble voice, it is true, but with even more than his usual crispness
and lucidity.

"Well, did you see him, Watson?"

"Yes; he is coming."

"Admirable, Watson!  Admirable!  You are the best of messengers."

"He wished to return with me."

"That would never do, Watson.  That would be obviously impossible.  Did
he ask what ailed me?"

"I told him about the Chinese in the East End."

"Exactly!  Well, Watson, you have done all that a good friend could.
You can now disappear from the scene."

"I must wait and hear his opinion, Holmes."

"Of course you must.  But I have reasons to suppose that this opinion
would be very much more frank and valuable if he imagines that we are
alone.  There is just room behind the head of my bed, Watson."

"My dear Holmes!"

"I fear there is no alternative, Watson.  The room does not lend itself
to concealment, which is as well, as it is the less likely to arouse
suspicion.  But just there, Watson, I fancy that it could be done."
Suddenly he sat up with a rigid intentness upon his haggard face.
"There are the wheels, Watson.  Quick, man, if you love me!  And don't
budge, whatever happens--whatever happens, do you hear?  Don't speak!
Don't move!  Just listen with all your ears."  Then in an instant his
sudden access of strength departed, and his masterful, purposeful talk
droned away into the low, vague murmurings of a semi-delirious man.

From the hiding-place into which I had been so swiftly hustled I heard
the footfalls upon the stair, with the opening and the closing of the
bedroom door.  Then, to my surprise, there came a long silence, broken
only by the heavy breathings and gaspings of the sick man.  I could
imagine that our visitor was standing by the bedside and looking down
at the sufferer.  At last that strange hush was broken.

"Holmes!" he cried.  "Holmes!" in the insistent tone of one who awakens
a sleeper.  "Can't you hear me, Holmes?"  There was a rustling, as if
he had shaken the sick man roughly by the shoulder.

"Is that you, Mr. Smith?"  Holmes whispered.  "I hardly dared hope that
you would come."

The other laughed.

"I should imagine not," he said.  "And yet, you see, I am here. Coals
of fire, Holmes--coals of fire!"

"It is very good of you--very noble of you.  I appreciate your special
knowledge."

Our visitor sniggered.

"You do.  You are, fortunately, the only man in London who does. Do you
know what is the matter with you?"

"The same," said Holmes.

"Ah!  You recognize the symptoms?"

"Only too well."

"Well, I shouldn't be surprised, Holmes.  I shouldn't be surprised if
it WERE the same.  A bad lookout for you if it is. Poor Victor was a
dead man on the fourth day--a strong, hearty young fellow.  It was
certainly, as you said, very surprising that he should have contracted
an out-of-the-way Asiatic disease in the heart of London--a disease,
too, of which I had made such a very special study.  Singular
coincidence, Holmes.  Very smart of you to notice it, but rather
uncharitable to suggest that it was cause and effect."

"I knew that you did it."

"Oh, you did, did you?  Well, you couldn't prove it, anyhow.  But what
do you think of yourself spreading reports about me like that, and then
crawling to me for help the moment you are in trouble?  What sort of a
game is that--eh?"

I heard the rasping, laboured breathing of the sick man.  "Give me the
water!" he gasped.

"You're precious near your end, my friend, but I don't want you to go
till I have had a word with you.  That's why I give you water.  There,
don't slop it about!  That's right.  Can you understand what I say?"

Holmes groaned.

"Do what you can for me.  Let bygones be bygones," he whispered. "I'll
put the words out of my head--I swear I will.  Only cure me, and I'll
forget it."

"Forget what?"

"Well, about Victor Savage's death.  You as good as admitted just now
that you had done it.  I'll forget it."

"You can forget it or remember it, just as you like.  I don't see you
in the witnessbox.  Quite another shaped box, my good Holmes, I assure
you.  It matters nothing to me that you should know how my nephew died.
It's not him we are talking about.  It's you."

"Yes, yes."

"The fellow who came for me--I've forgotten his name--said that you
contracted it down in the East End among the sailors."

"I could only account for it so."

"You are proud of your brains, Holmes, are you not?  Think yourself
smart, don't you?  You came across someone who was smarter this time.
Now cast your mind back, Holmes.  Can you think of no other way you
could have got this thing?"

"I can't think.  My mind is gone.  For heaven's sake help me!"

"Yes, I will help you.  I'll help you to understand just where you are
and how you got there.  I'd like you to know before you die."

"Give me something to ease my pain."

"Painful, is it?  Yes, the coolies used to do some squealing towards
the end.  Takes you as cramp, I fancy."

"Yes, yes; it is cramp."

"Well, you can hear what I say, anyhow.  Listen now!  Can you remember
any unusual incident in your life just about the time your symptoms
began?"

"No, no; nothing."

"Think again."

"I'm too ill to think."

"Well, then, I'll help you.  Did anything come by post?"

"By post?"

"A box by chance?"

"I'm fainting--I'm gone!"

"Listen, Holmes!"  There was a sound as if he was shaking the dying
man, and it was all that I could do to hold myself quiet in my
hiding-place.  "You must hear me.  You SHALL hear me.  Do you remember
a box--an ivory box?  It came on Wednesday.  You opened it--do you
remember?"

"Yes, yes, I opened it.  There was a sharp spring inside it. Some
joke--"

"It was no joke, as you will find to your cost.  You fool, you would
have it and you have got it.  Who asked you to cross my path?  If you
had left me alone I would not have hurt you."

"I remember," Holmes gasped.  "The spring!  It drew blood.  This
box--this on the table."

"The very one, by George!  And it may as well leave the room in my
pocket.  There goes your last shred of evidence.  But you have the
truth now, Holmes, and you can die with the knowledge that I killed
you.  You knew too much of the fate of Victor Savage, so I have sent
you to share it.  You are very near your end, Holmes. I will sit here
and I will watch you die."

Holmes's voice had sunk to an almost inaudible whisper.

"What is that?" said Smith.  "Turn up the gas?  Ah, the shadows begin
to fall, do they?  Yes, I will turn it up, that I may see you the
better." He crossed the room and the light suddenly brightened.  "Is
there any other little service that I can do you, my friend?"

"A match and a cigarette."

I nearly called out in my joy and my amazement.  He was speaking in his
natural voice--a little weak, perhaps, but the very voice I knew.
There was a long pause, and I felt that Culverton Smith was standing in
silent amazement looking down at his companion.

"What's the meaning of this?" I heard him say at last in a dry, rasping
tone.

"The best way of successfully acting a part is to be it," said Holmes.
"I give you my word that for three days I have tasted neither food nor
drink until you were good enough to pour me out that glass of water.
But it is the tobacco which I find most irksome.  Ah, here ARE some
cigarettes."  I heard the striking of a match.  "That is very much
better.  Halloa! halloa!  Do I hear the step of a friend?"

There were footfalls outside, the door opened, and Inspector Morton
appeared.

"All is in order and this is your man," said Holmes.

The officer gave the usual cautions.

"I arrest you on the charge of the murder of one Victor Savage," he
concluded.

"And you might add of the attempted murder of one Sherlock Holmes,"
remarked my friend with a chuckle.  "To save an invalid trouble,
Inspector, Mr. Culverton Smith was good enough to give our signal by
turning up the gas.  By the way, the prisoner has a small box in the
right-hand pocket of his coat which it would be as well to remove.
Thank you.  I would handle it gingerly if I were you.  Put it down
here. It may play its part in the trial."

There was a sudden rush and a scuffle, followed by the clash of iron
and a cry of pain.

"You'll only get yourself hurt," said the inspector.  "Stand still,
will you?"  There was the click of the closing handcuffs.

"A nice trap!" cried the high, snarling voice.  "It will bring YOU into
the dock, Holmes, not me.  He asked me to come here to cure him.  I was
sorry for him and I came.  Now he will pretend, no doubt, that I have
said anything which he may invent which will corroborate his insane
suspicions. You can lie as you like, Holmes.  My word is always as good
as yours."

"Good heavens!" cried Holmes.  "I had totally forgotten him.  My dear
Watson, I owe you a thousand apologies.  To think that I should have
overlooked you!  I need not introduce you to Mr. Culverton Smith, since
I understand that you met somewhat earlier in the evening. Have you the
cab below?  I will follow you when I am dressed, for I may be of some
use at the station.

"I never needed it more," said Holmes as he refreshed himself with a
glass of claret and some biscuits in the intervals of his toilet.
"However, as you know, my habits are irregular, and such a feat means
less to me than to most men.  It was very essential that I should
impress Mrs. Hudson with the reality of my condition, since she was to
convey it to you, and you in turn to him.  You won't be offended,
Watson?  You will realize that among your many talents dissimulation
finds no place, and that if you had shared my secret you would never
have been able to impress Smith with the urgent necessity of his
presence, which was the vital point of the whole scheme.  Knowing his
vindictive nature, I was perfectly certain that he would come to look
upon his handiwork."

"But your appearance, Holmes--your ghastly face?"

"Three days of absolute fast does not improve one's beauty, Watson.
For the rest, there is nothing which a sponge may not cure.  With
vaseline upon one's forehead, belladonna in one's eyes, rouge over the
cheek-bones, and crusts of beeswax round one's lips, a very satisfying
effect can be produced. Malingering is a subject upon which I have
sometimes thought of writing a monograph.  A little occasional talk
about half-crowns, oysters, or any other extraneous subject produces a
pleasing effect of delirium."

"But why would you not let me near you, since there was in truth no
infection?"

"Can you ask, my dear Watson?  Do you imagine that I have no respect
for your medical talents?  Could I fancy that your astute judgment
would pass a dying man who, however weak, had no rise of pulse or
temperature?  At four yards, I could deceive you.  If I failed to do
so, who would bring my Smith within my grasp?  No, Watson, I would not
touch that box.  You can just see if you look at it sideways where the
sharp spring like a viper's tooth emerges as you open it.  I dare say
it was by some such device that poor Savage, who stood between this
monster and a reversion, was done to death.  My correspondence,
however, is, as you know, a varied one, and I am somewhat upon my guard
against any packages which reach me.  It was clear to me, however, that
by pretending that he had really succeeded in his design I might
surprise a confession.  That pretence I have carried out with the
thoroughness of the true artist.  Thank you, Watson, you must help me
on with my coat.  When we have finished at the police-station I think
that something nutritious at Simpson's would not be out of place."











*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURE OF THE DYING DETECTIVE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.




